eee YY ESE oe
— ¢ &4%G% Liliana Becerra
| te Bey By
ee LS hon, ag Xe,
|
EGGS
;
. A se
r
rf
THEa PRINCIPLES OF
h
c
COLOUR MATERIAL NH S
af mf 4

408357
CMF DESIGN
The Fundamental Principles of
Colour, Material and Finish Design
CMF DESIGN
| want to extend my special thanks
to all the people who believed in
my vision and without hesitation,
supported this project with
enthusiasm and meaningful content.
PREFACE
PREFACE
Through several years of professional practice of CMF design, | have
received many enquiries from fellow colleagues, design professionals,
mentees and students, about where to find a good source of information
and reference about the field.
Since CMF design is a rather young discipline for which currently
there are no specialized or focused sources of information, | decided to
begin consolidating and sharing its key principles. Although it was not
always easy to develop clear explanations and practical methods for
thinking and doing, little by little my initial compilation of short articles
and presentations lead to the creation of this book.
Its content is supported by three main inputs: First, my accumulated
professional experience of over 15 years, working internationally with
major companies and consumer brands, both as an employee and as an
independent consultant; second, it reflects information obtained through
a series of expert interviews conducted with professionals with a signif-
icant level of experience in the industry and lastly; it presents a number
of case studies with innovative companies whom | had the pleasure of
personally visit and interview.
| have also had the opportunity to explore these principles in the
academic field through different settings involving workshops, independ-
ent studies, academic classes and guest lectures at different universities
around the world, including Aalto University in Finland, Tama Art Univer-
sity in Japan and Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, California.
Throughout this process, the exploration and incorporation of CMF
design into current design curriculums has proven to be an important and
relevant extension to current practices.
Since CMF design is a broad discipline encompassing different
industries, processes and products, the main emphasis of this book is on
industrially designed products and industrially manufactured consumer
goods, so that the principles presented here are fully supported by actual
industry standards and global manufacturing practices.
The final output is envisioned to serve as a canvas for best practices
within the discipline of CMF design and is not intended to be a prescrip-
tive formula. Moreover, there can be approaches to the process which
vary depending on regional and socio-cultural contexts, aspirational
values, type of industry, design field and market dynamics.
Liliana Becerra
CMF DESIGN
Photo taken at the Lechler Colour Design
exhibition at Fuorisalone 2015 in Milan.
INTRODUCTION
THE PUZZLE OF CMF DESIGN
When | first approached the task of unwrapping the concept of CMF
design, | began by separating and breaking down each of its three
components: colours, materials and finishes. As | made progress with
my writing and research process, | realized that this classification was
actually very difficult to maintain and it became evident that these three
elements are impossible to separate from one another.
Every material has its own array of optimal manufacturing processes,
which also provide a unique palette of effects. The beautiful shine of an
anodised aluminium surface happens only as the result of a thoughtful
combination between the reflectivity of the material, the right types
of dies, and its unique finishing processes. The hand and colour of a
leather piece dyed with natural pigments will be much softer and prone
to shifting through time and use, compared to a leather piece dyed with
traditional chemical processes
It is impossible to talk about colour without talking about surface
detail, texture, reflectivity and overall product composition, all important
components of CMF design. A painted colour will become more vivid
if applied over a lighter substrate and if coated with a glossy topcoat. A
surface with a soft touch finish will make the colour slightly more muted
and visually softer. A colour blocking design approach to a product will
convey a totally different message to the consumer than a product with a
tone-on-tone colour approach.
In most cases the process of CMF design requires a certain amount of
experimentation or trial and error, peppered with a healthy dose of obser-
vation, curiosity and creativity. Sometimes, the process may start with a
material exploration and its subsequent connection to form, surface and
colour will follow. In other cases, the colour or technology can become
the main innovation to the point of becoming the marketing message
itself.
Based on these premises, the concept of CMF design could be
approached as a “puzzle of elements” with multiple correct solutions,
depending on who is creating it and who it is created for. This does not
mean however that CMF design is a random process based on sudden
impulse or personal opinions but instead, it confirms that it is and actual
science, which should be supported by deliberate professional practice
and accumulated real-world experience.
CMF DESIGN
CMF DESIGN
1 Introduction to CMF Design
12 What is CMF Design?
13. The Industry
14 The CMF Design Professional
18 Q&A with Suzette Henry
2 Emotional Context
22 Perceived Value
23 Culture
25 Evocative Nature
26 Visual Design Languages
3 Functional Context
30 Target Consumers
30 Physical Environment
32 Product Categories
33 Time to Market
35 Marketplace
4 CMF Creation
38 Step 1: Information Gathering
41 Step 2: Establishing a Narrative
47 Step 3: Creating a CMF Strategy
52 Step 4: Understanding Part Break Up
57 Step 5: Creating CMF Palettes
62 Step 6: CMF Development
COLOUR DESIGN
5 Functional Attributes of Colours
68 Colour Affinity
69 Darks and Lights
71. Quiet and Loud
73 Colour Conventions
75 Brands and Colours
78 Colour Measuring Tools
CONTENT
6 Culture and Context of Colours
84 Black, Perilous Juice
86 White, Filling Goodness
88 Red, Pippin’ Hot Ice
90 Orange, Clever Snap
92 Yellow, Don’t Worry, Be Corny
94 Green, Lucky Lick
96 Blue, Keep it Cool
98 Purple, Beat the Boost
100 Silver, Intergalactic Mind
102 Gold, Flamboyant Reward
MATERIAL DESIGN
7 Materials First
108 Material Combination Strategies
8 Material Design Based on Sustainability
114 Case study: Sustainable Materials Design with the BMWi Series
120 Q&A with Sandy McGill
9 Material Design Based on Manufacturing Process
126 Case study: Machined Aluminium with Neal Feay
10 Surface Design Based on Product Strategy
136 Case study: Merging Surface Design and Product Strategy with rohi
FINISH DESIGN
11 Sensorial Finishes
142 Elevating Value
12 Functional Finishes
146 Q&A with Nancy Holman
150 Metals
166 Plastics
174 Textiles
180 Leather
188 Wood
194 Glass
198 Coatings

Colour, Material and Finish Design
CMF DESIGN
INTRODUCTION
TO CMF DESIGN
Although there are different approaches
to the practice of CMF design, which
vary according to geographical location,
type of industry, level of experience and
cultural backgrounds; some fundamen-
tal definitions that tend to be common
across the board.

CMF DESIGN
WHAT IS CMF DESIGN?
Colour, material and finish design is an emerging professional discipline
which focuses on designing and specifying colours, materials and finishes
to support both functional and emotional attributes of products. It is
an integral process that runs in parallel with the physical and technical
design of products. In some industries, it is considered a fundamental
part of the industrial design process itself. Identifying the most adequate
materials and finishing technologies to ensure the best possible product
performance is at the core of CMF design. Only when the perfect balance
between visual beauty and functional performance is achieved, can a
product provide a consistent and successful user experience.
The work in this discipline combines practical knowledge of func-
tional and technical properties of material technologies with intangible
human perceptions of value. Usually, when an object is noticed and
picked up upon impulse or curiosity by human hands, it is because its
visual appearance, often granted by the CMF design approach, triggers
an immediate emotional connection.
Besides the practical and the more intuitive knowledge, there are also
external influences that come into to play throughout the CMF design
process, such as socio-cultural and aesthetic trends, visual design lan-
guages, product categories and early adoption of products by influential
consumers groups.
Users can personalize their Jambox Bluetooth
speaker with thirteen different grills, nine cap
colours and a water resistant coating option.
12
INTRODUCTION TO CMF DESIGN
The smart Brabus tailor made packages offer the
possibility to express personal style. Customers
can continue the colour scheme from the exterior
to the interior with many options for the various
parts, leather seats, or even the stitching.
apus tailor made-
>> smart BR
Ba
unhumdrum.
give your smart a signature look with the BRABUS
tailor made program —a car that’s custom designed for
you, by you. make it classy, shiny, snappy or slick with
our collection of 30 exteriors, 20 leather options, contrast
stitching and 6 soft-top roof colors by BRABUS.
THE INDUSTRY
CMF design is practiced throughout a range of different industries,
including apparel, soft goods, consumer electronics, automotive, avia-
tion, cosmetics and packaging for fast moving consumer goods (FMCG).
The demand for CMF design expertise has increased in recent years
partly because consumer product manufactures are becoming aware of
the great potential in diversifying their product portfolio at a relatively
low cost, while still maintaining a similar or the same product shape,
functionality or tooling. In this case, CMF design works as a key avenue to
create a sense of novelty and higher value propositions within an existing
line of products.
From a marketing perspective, CMF design is a valuable tool when it
comes to positioning products, collections and categories according to
market tiers and consumer segmentations; as it allows for the creation of
emotional connections, added value and the fulfilment of certain human
aspirations such as beauty and belonging.
Major brands that have succeeded in the market place for a sustained
period of time such as Apple, Nike and MINI, as well as newly emerged
13
CMF DESIGN
ones like Jawbone, Beats, and Tesla, advocate for a very well-grounded
work on this discipline, often paired with innovative technology develop-
ment. For these brands, CMF design is a core area of innovation which
directly yields into higher brand value and therefore higher profits.
Design-driven organizations with a strong sense of colour and mate-
rial design normally have dedicated professional teams working in close
collaboration with other departments, such as engineering and mar-
keting, in a multi-disciplinary approach, placing product design quality
at the core of the process rather than as an after-thought. There are
also external and independent individuals and consultancies across the
globe whose focus is to advice small and large firms on different areas of
expertise within the CMF design discipline.
In the field of interior design and interior architecture the main focus
is on large-scale environmental solutions and installations where material
and finish choices are expected to last longer and to create bold visual
and environmental impact. Since this is a professional discipline with its
own line of design principles, requirements and regulations, this book
focuses mostly on CMF design for consumer-products and industrially
manufactured consumer goods.
THE CMF DESIGN PROFESSIONAL
The CMF design profession is a considerably young discipline that has
emerged and consolidated itself during recent years, slowly becoming
an independent, well-established design practice and a very sought-after
expertise.
Most professionals who work in the field come from a variety of
backgrounds and seem to have accumulated their knowledge through
hands-on experience. Among the design backgrounds are graphics,
textiles, industrial and product design, fashion, apparel, illustration,
branding and advertising. As important as the professional experience
however, is one’s innate sensibility to detect and articulate design lan-
guages and aesthetic trends, paired with the ability to understand and
translate consumer’s aspirations into concrete CMF solutions through
engaging storytelling.
There are different professional areas to master within the field of
CMF design. All of them are complementary to each other and there is no
definite boundary between them. The well-rounded CMF design profes-
sional will be versatile in all of them. It is possible however to encounter
designers who specialize in some areas more than others.
14
INTRODUCTION TO CMF DESIGN
Intern Kelley Rother performing
CMF exploration work at MLAb.
IoSHMcfuemoL znauAergrtybtet,e e s y
Colour Design
This area focuses on designing colour palettes with specific surface
finishes. Depending on material properties and on the final product
application, there are different ways to achieve colour effects. Part of the
colour effect can be the surface finish or the material itself. Most of the
work in this area is currently directed to paints and coatings development
for automotive interiors and exteriors, or for consumer goods. Besides the
technical aspect, the work on colour development requires to be in tune
with the ever-changing seasonal market trends.
Colour Development
This area involves professional exterior and interior paint and finish
developers, who have a strong chemistry background. The core activities
mostly happen in a lab, mixing of inks and paints in order to create nov-
elty effects with strong technical performance, depending on the industry
and the functionality required for the colour. There are companies that
specialize only in colour and surface development, serving a range of
different industries.
Material Design
It generally consists of ideating new and connecting existing material
technologies with functional requirements and emerging aesthetic and
design trends. In many cases, products with innovative materials instantly
become iconic and recognizable within the market place, to the point that
15
CMF DESIGN
material design can become a key element of the brand DNA. Material
designers have a strong aesthetic sensibility and an innate curiosity for
material exploration, which often leads them to create innovative designs.
Material Development
This area focuses on creating high-performance materials according to
the technical specifications and functional requirements of products. In
most cases, materials developers have a strong engineering background
or work closely with material engineers. Often, materials developers work
in parallel with material designers so that the development can focus
more on the technical and functional aspects of the material.
Surface Design
This area focuses on the design of structures, patterns and graphics,
which are then applied to products’ surfaces. These include a broad range
of natural and synthetic laminates, paper, textiles, carpets and upholstery
utilized for home furnishings, apparel, wall coverings, floor coverings
and decorative papers — mostly present within in the hospitality and the
interior design industry. Although surface design is considered an impor-
tant part of CMF design, it is also a stand-alone professional discipline for
which a corresponding professional degree can be acquired.
Finish Design
This area focuses on designing the final look and feel of products’
surfaces with emphasis on manufacturing processes, involving functional
and aesthetic characteristics. In most cases, finish design is intrinsic to
material design. In fact, some finishes can only be specified according to
the material’s functional properties or manufacturing possibilities. Since
this is one of the building blocks of CMF design, the third part of this
‘AeQ3$sbs0V3ee uW9zweIzi|yWNn Soo
Gathered material samples are displayed on the
trend table, aiding in the CMF design ideation
and development process.
16
INTRODUCTION TO CMF DESIGN
book is dedicated entirely to outline the most common finishing pro-
cesses according to materials.
CMF Strategy
This aspect oversees all CMF design ideation and development based
on marketing and strategic product offering, which usually targets 3 to
S years out. The professionals working in this area tend to have a strong
understanding of consumer insights and are very good at articulating
them into concrete product and market opportunities. They are usually
long-term visionaries who can be very concrete when it comes to tangible
outcomes. This aspect is directly connected with the business side of
design since every CMF design offering will be sold and marketed directly
to the final consumers.
CMF Development
This area focuses on working closely with vendors in order to develop
the specified colours, materials and finishes of products directly for
mass-production. Usually this process starts with a target sample, which
is then translated technically into a “production usable” material. This
is usually a very long process because every sample has to go through
an extensive round of approvals, not only in terms of colour, material
or finish but also in terms of required technical product specifications.
For people working in this area, it is highly recommended to have good
organizational skills and some basic knowledge of spreadsheets, in order
to successfully track the development, production, approval and overall
status of samples.
Trend Tracking and Forecasting
In order to anticipate consumers’ wants and needs, CMF designers must
anticipate future consumer behaviours and thus, master the ability to
forecast emerging trends that will change the market place. Professionals
who are experts in this area are very dependable for companies leading
the way to the future, as they are able to create scenarios to visualize
how products will evolve. Other non-design professionals working in
trend tracking and forecasting include futurists and social scientist with a
strong consumer insights background.
Storytelling and Marketing
Every CMF designer must be an outstanding storyteller, capable to
support and sell ideas to other people both within the company and to
the ultimate consumer. Storytelling should not just be based on blue-sky
thinking, but on concrete facts and figures to demonstrate why a certain
material or a specific colour can increase the consumer appeal and there-
fore the bottom line in terms of brand value and ultimately profits.
17
CMF DESIGN
SUZETTE HENRY —
Suzette Henry started her career in the fashion industry both in sales
and merchandising, followed by manufacturing, where she became an
expert in sourcing textiles, knits and communicating with vendors at
Guess Apparel. She later specialized in denim and opened the first of
several material libraries. During her 11 years at Nike, she created the
first material design role and opened Jordan’s first material library.
As the Material Designer for Jordan, her work focused on integrating
exclusive colours and materials in hierarchy products, encouraging
partnerships for the brand. Currently she is the Material Director of
MLab where she has created a unique material resource for Pensole
— the first footwear-specific design school in North America. She con-
tinues to mentor and open educational opportunities to future Pensole
students and design professionals who want to empower their current
role, as well as consulting through a colour, material and design lens.
How do you define CMF design from a footwear design
perspective?
CMF is about the DNA of materials. You must identify all the aspects you
encounter in your design brief. There is the Material ID, which innovates,
inspires and solves a problem. Then you have the Consumer ID which
describes your consumer and how they will be using your product,
i.e. geography, lifestyle and price point. Then you need to validate the
Performance ID, i.e. how is that material going to be used in the context
of testing standards. You also look at the Function ID which specifies
whether it is going to be climate sensitive, water proof or water resistant,
whether it will have a safety element and how it is supposed to function
within design. There is also the Aesthetic ID. It has to inspire but it also
has to influence. The aesthetic is really what the consumers see on the
shelves and how the CMF design entices them to pick that shoe off the
shelf and try it on. Once a person has the garment or the footwear on,
80% of the sale is made — and that is all aesthetics. Then you have the
Material Construction ID which details whether it is a woven, a knit, a
18
Q&A
micro fibre or maybe coated leather. And the last piece that is also part of
the Consumer ID, is whether it is sustainable, whether there is something
behind the brand message that makes it validated within a sustainable
point of view. Have you provided a compelling product for your consumer
to be brand loyal? All of those things to me are what CMF design is about.
Can you name three finishes or material processes specific to the
footwear industry?
In footwear, you have a range of finishes that can be applied to a product.
These include transparency or translucency, colour shift or spectra flair —
which are pigments that are very effective on synthetics because they can
give the impression of lightness or refinement. Being able to tell a story
using white for consumers in different geography’s is easy when you want
your product to communicate characteristics like artic, crisp, fractured
and structured or, protective, resilient and true. These may not be specific
to footwear any longer, because | am aware of automotive trim designers
borrowing these cues from footwear. Also currently trending are what
we Call “low profile packages”. These are created by combining a per-
formance base layer — something breathable with stretch and recovery
properties — with a foam middle section that adds not only cushion,
protection, and aesthetic function but also a colour cue and, lastly, a top
layer that is either heat moulded or laminated and provides support and
structure. Upper constructions are so much more versatile than just three
years ago with the use of packages. This is a huge design tool, as well as
branding opportunity.
How is the push for sustainability changing CMF design in the
footwear industry?
Sustainability is a huge discipline in footwear and part of almost every
seasonal approach. Coming from a Nike background where about 99%
of the vendors or suppliers already have a sustainability POV, you are
provided with materials that are 100% sustainable in the processes or, for
instance in the case of leather, finished through a water-based system.
In the design process it is a lot easier to apply sustainability through 3D
tools such as “Pattern Cut “or “Knife Cut” that optimize material usage so
there is less waste. Sustainability guides how a material is made, how it
is going to be used, how it is going to be integrated in the design process
and in the brand language.
19
CMF DESIGN
EMOTIONAL CONTEAT
There are several intangible aspects to
the CMF design process. After all, we
live in a physical world that we experi-
ence primarily through memories and
emotional connections.
20

CMF DESIGN
PERCEIVED VALUE
Conveying positive emotions through a sensorial experience can elevate
the value of the products. At least 80% of CMF design is about the per-
ceived value it creates for the consumer. Every human being, regardless
of ethnicity, social status, education or gender, is looking for aspirational
objects to fulfil emotional needs and intangible benefits such as status,
beauty and belonging. Creating value through CMF design considers not
only the learned knowledge of actual high-end manufacturing processes
but also the cultural connections that are purely based on emotional
perceptions, transforming ordinary objects into status symbols.
The objects we surround ourselves with, besides those serving a
purely functional purpose, are a reflection of who we are or who we
aspire to become. This added value of objects goes beyond simple
Aeeoqlmj1 i0ep4geq y y
Joseph is a religious man from Gomboi Village
in Ghana. His most prized possession is his
New Testament. He bought it used, as it was
small enough to fit his pocket. He appreciates
the leather cover since it prevents wear and tear,
making it easy to carry it around.
22
EMOTIONAL CONTEXT
functionality and becomes a reflection of our own physical experiences
and the emotional connections we make with the world. Added value
can be real or it can be just a perception. Either way, the goal of creating
aspirational and desirable objects is at the core of CMF design.
Real value will most likely be tangible and measurable through the use
of high-end materials, intricate surface finishes or complex manufacturing
processes, utilized to provide a product with better quality, higher perfor-
mance and therefore, a higher price point.
Perceived value on the other hand, can be created in order to provide
a product with the appearance of being high-end. This can be achieved
through the use of low-cost novelty surface finishes, eye-catching colour
combinations, or by creating an overall aesthetic composition with the
resemblance to a luxurious object. It is possible to convey a sense of pres-
tige at an affordable price, without necessarily using expensive materials
or technologies.
CULTURE
Understanding the cultural background of the targeted consumers and
engaging with the context in which the product will be placed, are fun-
damental steps for a successful product and brand positioning. Aesthetic
perceptions change based on cultural backgrounds. There are different
and ever-changing influences for each consumer group. Even consumer
groups are constantly shifting, merging and evolving. Products need to
support different aesthetic values and aspirations according to different
influences or trends, which can be local, global or a fusion of both.
Since aesthetic preferences are directly linked to different CMF
elements, the same colour, material or finish can be perceived differently
depending on culture. For example, novelty and new access to prestig-
ious brands and iconic products are the main aspirations for the growing
emerging middle class in countries such as Brazil and China. Although
these two cultures are very different from each other, novelty is a com-
mon, coveted attribute for products and experiences, as it is considered
a symbol of progress, optimism, social mobility and self-improvement. In
Western Europe on the other hand, with the increasing economic hard-
ship of recent years, austerity, knowledge and experiences are becoming
the main aspirations of consumers, reflecting a spiritual and moral
enlightenment. These values are brought to products through the use of
authentic or sustainable materials, such as wood and metals, which tend
to age gracefully with time, developing rustic and pleasant patinas.
It is very likely that emerging middle class consumers from young
23
CMF DESIGN
Nespresso and the Chinese lifestyle brand
Shanghai Tang collaborated on a four-item
collection in 2012, the year of the dragon,
featuring the mystical and majestic dragon as
a key design element. The collection takes the
coffee connoisseur on a complete multi-sensory
journey while localizing Nespresso brand and
globalizing the Shanghai Tang brand.
NESPRESSO
i
|
| i
economies would not settle for products offering rustic and aged looks
as they would not fulfil the physical representation of their aspirations.
In the same way, polished, reflective and vibrant colours and surfaces
would most likely be perceived a symbol of loud “bling” or “new money”
by most Western European consumers, for whom, a more quiet aesthetic
is preferred.
24
EMOTIONAL CONTEXT
EVOCATIVE NATURE
Materials and finishes have an evocative nature. Every person has a pre-
conceived idea about a certain material’s functional and perceived value.
This is key because in many cases, the evocative meaning of a material or
colour can be far more powerful the actual one. Traditionally, the mate-
rials that better seem to maintain their real and perceived value through
time, from culture to culture, are those derived from natural resources.
Minerals like diamonds, crystal, glass and precious metals such as gold,
platinum and titanium are at the top of the list when it comes to high real
and perceived value. In fact, a number of contemporary finishes try to
emulate visual characteristics of original precious minerals and metals in
order to evoke a feeling of high end. Other materials have a lower per-
ceived value. Plastics, for example, have a more disposable nature, which
recently has been connected with environmental issues. Another aspect
that aids the low perceived value of plastic is its ease of manufacturing
which allows for the production of high volumes at a relatively low cost,
making it an ubiquitous material. Despite of being a highly functional
material, its lack of rareness — especially in recent times — is pushing it
towards the low end side of the perceived value spectrum.
Transparent table by Nendo with a moulded
wooden-like surface texture. By moulding a
natural wood grain into the plastic, an evocative
visual and tactile reference is created, making a
new product appear more familiar and elevating
its perceived value.
25
CMF DESIGN
Recently a new paradox between materials’ functional properties and
their visual appearance has emerged, generating contradiction and
debate between how a material looks and what functional properties it
is able to offer. Smart materials no longer need to be rigid or voluminous
in order to have the strongest resistance to impact. Re-engineered
polycarbonate, for example, is currently utilized to make sunroof panels
for high-end sports cars, not only because of its high resistance to shock
properties but also because of its light weight.
VISUAL DESIGN LANGUAGES
Visual design languages are the overall composition of forms, lines, mate-
rials and in general visual cues of products. They reveal the point in time
when objects were created and the available technologies that shaped
them. Sometimes these elements become iconic representations of not
only function but technology and time.
The physical appearance of contemporary products is not always
a reflection of their targeted functionality but in many cases becomes
an emotional trigger charged with a powerful aesthetic expression. By
sending visual messages about key functionalities of the product or by
enhancing more intangible elements linked to aspirational lifestyles, CMF
design plays a powerful part in creating iconic and instantly recognizable
visual languages.
Visual languages are of vital importance when positioning products
on a specific market tier or a consumer segment. Some visual languages
are rooted in historical references that have become iconic with the
passing of time. Other visual languages in turn, are a consequence of
technical material innovation and performance, which has radically
changed manufacturing processes, form factors or functionality. A good
example is the use of carbon fibre in consumer products today. Carbon
fibre has functional properties of strength, durability and weightlessness
to the point, that in many cases a surface making reference to carbon
fibre, can help a product to convey the message — real or perceived — of
being light-weight and high-performing. —
One interesting example of iconic aesthetics is our constant desire to
re-visit the past by looking back to previous decades. Our contemporary
reference to vintage is deeply charged with images of affection and mem-
orabilia of a recent past, generally influenced by the non-digital era. Such
is the case of traditional Polaroid photography, hand-written calligraphy
or the resurgence of the “makers”. In an increasingly digital world, prod-
ucts offering an emotional connection with these attributes are becoming
highly coveted by consumers.
26
EMOTIONAL CONTEXT
Polaroid camera from 1972, designed by Charles
and Ray Eames. The Polaroid camera represents
an iconic visual design language revolving around
clear functional elements, highlighted by the
practicality of the materials. Today the iconic
image of a Polaroid camera is a graphic element
utilized to denote picture-taking functionality.
Product courtesy of Amaya Gutierrez’s Collection.
ZG
CMF DESIGN
FUNCTIONAL CONTEXT
In the practice of colour, material
and finish design, context is everything.
Understanding and leveraging the
right context where products will live
can make the difference between a
successful or a failed product.

CMF DESIGN
TARGET CONSUMERS
There are different functional needs and expectations when it comes to
interacting with a product. Clearly defining and identifying the consumer
group will help to design and target products more accurately. Target
consumers are the outcome of a process commonly known as consumer
segmentation. In order to target them more accurately with customized
messages or products, large and small companies classify people into
groups according to a set of similar characteristics and consumption
behaviours. Depending on the business model, companies may target
only one or several consumer groups.
To create well-targeted CMF design, it is very important to work
closely with the people who create the consumer segmentation. Within
large organizations, they can be part of an internal division which is usu-
ally called “consumer insights”. They can also be external agencies fully
dedicated to consumer understanding. Once the consumer segments
have been clearly defined; it is the job of the designer to bring them to life
by materializing their aspirations into tangible design elements. Normally
this work is done by professionals who have experience and backgrounds
like design insights or design ethnography and are able to bridge the gap
between the world of consumer insights and the world or design. These
are key people to work with in order to ensure that new products are well
received by the right group of consumers.
As part of the product development process, companies often
schedule several rounds of consumer feedback with a series of focus
groups in which potential product users are invited to view a set of
physical prompts or appearance models that are close enough to the final
product, both aesthetically and functionally, in order to provide real-time
feedback. Although this practice is controversial for some — who state
that consumers cannot anticipate the future — it can help anticipate
potential preferences in terms of aesthetic wants and needs or in terms of
functional challenges that may arise throughout the product usage.
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The functional context in which products will be utilized influences a
great number of decisions regarding its colour, material and finish speci-
fications. There are different types of physical environments to consider
when specifying colours and materials. One of them is the space where
products will be fully functional and operational. This can be an interior or
an exterior or a combination of both, depending on the product.
30
FUNCTIONAL CONTEXT
Sports equipment for example, will necessarily have to comply and fulfil
a number of technical specifications related to the performance of such
sport. If the sport happens outdoors, the CMF design must consider dif-
ferent aspects connected to environmental conditions, such as extreme
exposure to sunlight or humidity resistance.
There is also the personal environment, which is tightly connected
to the personal space and the lifestyle of the user. Objects do not live
in isolation but coexist in the same space with other products and in
different arrangements, depending on the user’s aesthetic preferences,
values and aspirations. These considerations are particularly important
because they help us think in terms of overall lifestyle and systems of
products, interconnected functionally or aesthetically, rather than single
BKPbeehyvto ithnou ne
Skate boarder in training with his corresponding
sports gear and lifestyle accessories which are
not only unique in terms of materials, but also in
terms of aesthetic lifestyle. Venice, California.
31
CMF DESIGN
or isolated items. Projecting an entire product range or brand to be
part of an entire eco system of products will ensure quicker and better
adoption from the users.
PRODUCT CATEGORIES
Within different industries, there are different families of objects sharing
similar functionality or brand strategy, targeting a specific group of
users, or presenting a common formal and visual aesthetic. There can be
several classifying principles for product categories and sub-categories,
most of which are a combination of all these characteristics. Product
categories are of crucial importance because they ensure the correct
market positioning of goods and therefore a higher potential to reach
the right audience via different channels, such as marketing, advertising,
retail environment, e-commerce and other “touch points”. Regardless of
the type of product the CMF is designed for, it is necessary to ensure a
thorough understanding of the product category it belongs to, in order to
correctly specify both its functional and emotional design attributes.
or \
34
J
AS7|J0Sg|OS 09E Og}Yg I NOD
Bell & Ross product categories are differentiated
by clear design and CMF elements. The left
watch, the BR 123 Original Carbon, is part of the
Vintage Original collection and the right one,
the BR-X1, belongs to the Aviation collection
32
FUNCTIONAL CONTEXT
Cyclist in motion showcasing his own
professional bicycle equipment in use.
PbDYihyaco meta og uchi
Bell & Ross is a brand that creates and markets its collections based
on product categories with clear design elements that have become
iconic through time. The Vintage Original collection for example is
inspired by watches worn by pilots in the 1940’s with important differen-
tiating design and CMF elements including the circular shape, the matte
finish of the case, the round domed crystal and the finish of the straps
— all of which contribute to the feeling of authenticity of timepieces of
the past. The Chronograph collection on the other hand offers a sporty
design, with an iconic square shape directly inspired by aeronautical
flight instruments, providing a contemporary feeling driven by utility.
Other interesting examples of product category positioning are found
in the bicycle industry. Although most bicycles have similar functionality,
they can be used for a number of different activities, ranging from com-
petitive racing to urban commuting. For competitive racing alone, there
can be different sub-categories including cycle-cross, mountain bike,
track cycling and BMX. Urban commuting bicycles on the other hand,
will be targeting short-distance, casual riders who are highly driven by
urban lifestyle, and therefore this category of bicycles will be more style
oriented with less functional features.
TIME TO MARKET
Based on technical constrains, external regulations and required product
performance, there are different life cycles in every industry, making
some products harder to produce and longer lasting than others. CMF
design must carefully consider the useful life cycle of products in order to
33
CMF DESIGN
guarantee its accurate performance and enduring aesthetic appeal.
Not all CMF design approaches are suitable for all industries. While
certain materials, colours or surfaces may look good on a range of prod-
ucts, they may not transfer well onto other applications. Variable aspects
to design such as product dimensions, scale and ultimately, the end
purpose of the product itself, are important considerations when translat-
ing a CMF design approach from one industry to the next. This has to do
with the different speeds of aesthetic cycles in different industries and in
some of them, certain combinations and aesthetics become visually tiring
faster than in others.
Different industries rely on different product and time-to-market
cycles. Consumers already have certain expectations from products in
terms of functionality and aesthetics according to the category they
belong to — apparel, consumer electronics, automotive, etc. — and these
expectations should always be anticipated and managed.
In general, consumer goods that are created through longer time-
to-market cycles also tend to stay in the market for longer periods of
time. Depending on the industry, consumers will more likely invest higher
quantities of money in products that are longer lasting then in products
that have a shorter lifespan and fade away with seasons.
Fast-pace industries allow for bolder aesthetic experimentation when
it comes to CMF design, while slow-paced industries rely on more tra-
ditional and long-lasting aesthetic attributes. They focus on the creation
of timeless or more classic aesthetics, which will preserve their real and
perceived value for a longer period of time.
In fashion for example, the lifespan of goods is defined by seasons.
é 10
R&D cost
< Product lifecycle
Standards & Regulations
Manufacturing complexity
Market cycle graph showing different
product industries and their market cycles.
34
EMOTIONAL CONTEXT
This sets up a very fast pace for the industry, where collections are
typically designed looking at 6 to 12 months out. The quality of garments
in terms of colours, materials and finishes is therefore not expected to
perform or outlast a cycle of about 12 months.
In the automotive industry on the other hand, companies are looking
at longer development times due to a slower pace of adoption and imple-
mentation of new technologies. Cars are typically designed looking 3 to 5
years out. This implies a longer lasting approach to colours, materials and
finishes which is tightly connected to the development and adoption of
new technologies.
The ideal CMF design offering will ensure longevity and timelessness
of aesthetic and functional elements for products created with a longer
life cycle in mind, and quick personalization opportunities for what is
considered a fast “product update” supported by changing or tweaking
small portions or coloured parts within the same line of products.
MARKETPLACE
In many cases, the marketplace itself dictates the product innovation
cycle. Market retailers drive an important aspect of the creation of CMF
design variants, as they directly request exclusive colours, materials
or finishes from product manufacturers. This strategy helps them to
differentiate themselves from the competition while bringing a sense of
exclusivity to consumers within mass-market products. Such is the case
of mobile device retailers in the United States where different carriers
request at least one exclusive colour to generally match their brand
colour. Through this approach, the products offered by different retailers
can be exactly the same in terms of form and functionality, but each will
have unique exclusive colours.
In the context of retail, different product categories are called SKUs
(stock-keeping units). These are unique identifiers for each distinct
product or CMF design variant that can be purchased. Depending on the
variations in colours, surface patterns or materials made to one product;
the number of SKUs will also increase. Managing inventory then becomes
an important part of CMF product placement within the marketplace.
There are certain items that move faster than others. Sometimes, even
after extensive trend tracking and forecasting, some products will simply
don’t sell and will need to be modified or removed from the shelves
quickly. In order to produce a successful retail-driven portfolio of prod-
ucts from a CMF design perspective, it is crucial to work tightly with the
marketing the end point of sales teams.
35
CMF DESIGN
CMF CREATION
CMF design should be conducted in
parallel with product ideation and
development so that it can support
and enhance physical aspects such
as scale, form and functionality.
36

CMF DESIGN
INFORMATION GATHERING
There are many different pieces to the puzzle of CMF design. Getting
all these pieces together will help maximize time and results. The first
step consists of gathering as much information as possible about the
product to be designed.
One approach to gathering information is to visit consumers who are
already using the products and interview them by formulating questions
focused on functional features related to colours, materials and finishes.
This process can help draw interesting insights related to functional
elements, which may not be fulfilling consumers’ functional or aesthetic
needs. A very effective way to approach this research is by asking users
to empty their wallets, their pockets or in specific product cases, their
backpacks, while describing each of the objects they have and its corre-
sponding functional and/or aesthetic benefit. This will give us an idea of
the different objects that surround the user and the context where the
product will have a useful life.
Product Brief
The product brief is a short summary document outlining the overall
scope of the project, the specific task at hand, the budget and the
expected timeline. It is the single most important piece of information
required in order to initiate the CMF design process. Moreover, the better
the quality of a product brief, the clearer the task and the more successful
the design. Ideally, a good product brief includes as much information
as possible about the target consumers such as age group, gender,
geographical location, type of market and product category (exclusive,
mainstream or low-end). Also any market research and competitors
information, such as products that are already out there with potentially
interesting and competitive features worth considering, is very useful.
For independent consultancies, the product brief comes directly from
the client. Within large organizations that have embedded CMF teams,
it may come from the product planning, the marketing department or it
can be created in conjunction with the overall product design brief. In any
case and for best practices, it is never recommended to initiate any work
without receiving it and understanding the requested product brief.
Since CMF design is directly related to manufacturing costs, once
the product brief is received, it is crucial to understand and establish the
possible accomplishments in terms of manufacturing technologies within
the given time frame and budget. This process involves managing the
expectations of the client in terms of actual budget and desired task. As
a general rule, creating completely new CMF designs will automatically
38
CMF CREATION
YbbcDPacyniyahaodcco mnc.lett aki oespgt nau tccskh i
i)
2v S
°“4
g re
z o
o>Es
] m a
vi
One way to gather information about a product is
to ask consumers who already use it to empty their
backpack and describe the contents’ benefits.
39
CMF DESIGN
increase the project complexity and will most likely result in higher
manufacturing costs as well as longer production and time to market.
There can be different levels of CMF design involvement required.
The most basic level of involvement normally consist of supporting
the “refresh” of the existing product portfolio. This can be achieved by
creating new colours, materials or finishes variants without necessarily
changing the existing product design. In these cases, there is no need to
develop new parts or new form factors, instead the focus is on creating a
refresh based on emerging aesthetic and consumer trends. Some exam-
ples of a basic level project could be changing the colour of a bottle cap
from blue to green in order to make it look more sustainable or tweaking
the graphics of a product label into a hand-written font, in order to make
it feel more authentic. Both of these examples belong to what is known
as the FMCG industry (fast moving consumer goods), where fast product
turnaround is expected while operating under very tight budgets.
The most complex level of involvement consists of specifying many
different new parts and components for a single product. Such is the case
in projects involving the CMF design for aviation and automotive interi-
ors, where besides the many different parts — a car interior typically has
more than 350 parts — there are also many different materials, finishes
and technical requirements for every part according to industry stand-
ards. Product innovation cycles in these industries tend to take longer to
be achieved. The CMF design process for automotive interiors typically
begins about 42 months before initiating its production.
Surveying the Market
Surveying and analysing the market before starting to create the CMF
design is a fundamental grounding exercise to get closer to the target
consumer. Competitors’ analysis and market research are complex pro-
cesses, generally conducted by experts with professional backgrounds
in marketing, statistics, and business strategy. This work consists of
mapping or positioning existing and future products according to market
tiers and target consumers. Within large organizations, this information
is generally available through the consumer insights or portfolio plan-
ning departments. Within smaller companies, this process is normally
outsourced to external consultants. It is a good professional practice
to request and to be informed of any available or existing competitor’s
analysis data.
For CMF design purposes, the process of surveying the market is
conducted by designers and utilized specifically to draw design insights.
This process can be conducted through different methodologies involving
design ethnography or design thinking, for which there are plenty of
existing sources, bibliographies and references. Key is that the market
survey processes conducted by designers will by nature focus more on
40
CMF CREATION
qualitative, rather than quantitative methods of assessment.
One approach is to visit the market place to observe, photograph
and purchase similar products or potential competing products. This
process gives an idea of existing functional features and aesthetic trends
currently happening in the marketplace. Normally there is already a lot of
innovation out there worth to be noted and in some cases improved — an
approach that can avoid wasting time and resources trying to re-invent
the wheel.
Visiting and surveying the market can also involve cross-pollinating
ideas from different industries and anticipating similarities of product
preferences and usage. For instance, home appliances and consumer
electronics are currently merging into an entirely new product category
where functionalities such as touch screens or motion sensors, which
were previously exclusive to consumer electronics, have entered the
home arena.
) 2 ESTABLISHING A NARRATIVE
Besides the technical and practical work that lies beneath CMF
design, it is equally important to create and develop an engaging
narrative for every project.
Storytelling
Storytelling is a compelling way to communicate the design in order to
engage clients and ultimate consumers, through key visual elements and
concrete messages. This process is more effective if it is grounded on real
world events, emerging consumer behaviour or current market trends, so
that it will not only make the story more relatable but also more relevant
and engaging. There are different ways to build a story but most of them
initiate by creating a general context or a framework and then connecting
the initial problem or challenge with the proposed design strategy in a
cohesive way.
Storytelling is in itself an entire discipline, but key for CMF design
is that the message of the story, besides being relevant to actual market
events, also has to be intriguing, creative and unique from a colour,
material or technology perspective. If we take Nike for instance, their
stories are often rooted in material and technology innovations, which are
so disruptive and innovative that they become also part of the marketing
message. Nike Flyknit for instance, promotes the fact that the shoes
are created with an ultra-strong yard knit woven into different textures,
shaping the form and eliminating unnecessary weight.
Not all stories are right for all products however, even if they are
41
CMF DESIGN
Acollection of different images, objects,
materials, textures and key words, selected to
create and communicate an engaging narrative.
current. It all depends on what is good for the brand, the product and
the consumer. In some cases the key story is already part of the brand
and thus must be transferred into the different CMF elements — think of
Coca-Cola and the happiness campaign, which immediately triggers a
specific set of colours and graphic elements in our mind. In other cases
it is possible to embed the brand with a new message based on a fresh
CMF story. Some key stories that are developing at the moment in a
cross-industry approach include, honesty of materials and sustainable
manufacturing processes, as well as aspects involving local sourcing,
respect for traditional know-how and skill preservation. All of them are
rooted in a collective return to consciousness that we are experiencing at
42
CMF CREATION
the moment, which is pushing us to re-evaluate how products are made,
where they came from and what their actual environmental impact is.
The Power of Trend Tracking
During my professional practice, | have developed a substantial and com-
pelling process for understanding and working with trends, from defining
what they actually are, to mapping them according to different categories
and influences in order to draw different insights. This process happens
now naturally on an on-going basis almost like a trained intuition. The
main essence when working with trends is to understand that they are not
static, but a fast moving, living entity which is always changing, merging
and diversifying.
There are different labels of trends, ranging from the macro level,
which involves big picture changes and events, to the micro level, which
focuses on tangible and quantifiable manifestations of the macro trends.
Consumer products and consumer goods respond to a number of shifts in
technologies, socio-cultural attitudes and general dynamics of offer and
demand within the market place. Understanding, managing and leverag-
ing this context is where the professional field of trend tracking comes in.
The trend tracking process is based on constant observation, documen-
tation and analysis of different shifts within the market context. Since this
is an ongoing process that runs in parallel with the design of products, it
also allows us to look back in time in order to discover patterns of evolu-
tion which can in turn, help anticipate possible future scenarios, as well
as emerging consumers’ needs, desires and aspirations.
When designing colours, materials and finishes, all levels of trends are
important. Although some brands tend to connect colours and materials
with micro-trends only, it is important to also understand the impact that
big picture level trends will have on the products we are designing. One
interesting case is how emerging technologies are enabling materials to
be thinner, lighter and stronger, and thus driving the use of more trans-
lucent, layered and softer colour effects. This trend is based not only on
visual aesthetics but also on actual functional benefits provided by new
technologies.
When it comes specifically to colour trends, different colours or
colour combinations can be driven by many factors including changes
within the economic landscape. For instance, in recent years the price
of gold has increased in the stock market, spiking demand for the
material together with a new wave of gold-like consumer products and
a new appreciation for this noble metal. Likewise, the re-birth of natural
pigments, which derives from global concern for the protection of the
environment and the support to more localised and sustainable produc-
tion methods, is driving totally new colour design strategies and market-
ing campaigns.
43
CMF DESIGN
Several companies, who are also suppliers of paints, coatings and pig-
ments, create colour forecasting books and brochures on a seasonal
basis, in order to promote their brand and their most recent colours and
surface innovations to their potential clients. In these publications, colour
is promoted in parallel to inspirational visual mood boards, statistic colour
data and actual physical samples presenting the new effects. The process
has been a common practice within the automotive industry for many
years, at least since 1987, as traditionally this was the very industry that
drove colour trends.
There are companies whose focus is solely to research, create and
produce physical and digital trend forecasting tools including books,
audio-visual presentations and a series of inspiring prompts to inspire
and guide the work on CMF trend forecasting and design. For some of
these companies the focus is more fashion and style oriented, while for
others it is more about the materials with their corresponding visual and
seasonal effects.
Creating Personas
Creating personas is one of the many different types of design ethnog-
raphy tools, utilized to obtain and communicate cues and insights about
consumers. Personas are archetypes or representations of people, their
life, desires, aspirations and values. They are based on real data and not
on stereotypes or cultural assumptions, in fact, creating personas based
on real world data will help us avoid fixating on stereotypical ideas or
misconceptions about markets or consumers.
The main difference between personas and mood boards is that
personas focus mainly on the lifestyle context — social activities, environ-
ments, culture — while mood boards focus on key and concrete aesthetic
cues to support the design process. It is recommended to create personas
and mood boards in parallel when working with CMF design because,
while personas bring our consumer’s world to life, mood boards connect
consumers directly with specific visual and functional elements of design.
Creating Mood Boards
Mood boards are a conceptual aid created to provide instant inspiration
and an emotional connection with the targeted consumers. They repre-
sent their desires and aspirations as well as the look and feel of the prod-
ucts and objects within their physical world. Mood boards don’t always
need to be completely realistic or literal, they can also be a projection or
an aspirational lifestyle represented with different visual cues.
Normally, mood boards are utilized within companies as a way to
materialize and articulate intangible, aspirational values into visual and
functional aesthetic elements. In most cases they work as style guides
or look and feel directions for the further creation, development and
4d
CMF CREATION
/
Collection of booklets created and distributed
by the trend forecasting and publishing agency
Trend Union, during their seasonal trend briefing
sessions. The books highlight the main topics
presented during the season through the use of
powerful imagery and text.
Set of trend books created and distributed by
Bridge of Weir® a company that specializes in
the production of fine upholstery lathers. The
books showcase the latest surface texture and
colour trends with corresponding samples and
inspiring visuals.
45
CMF DESIGN
TREND SUMMARY
The New Normal addresses our changing values and
consumption habits as a result of the economic situation.
Consumers are wishing to get more from less without
sacrificing quality or desirability. Regardless of socioeconomic
background, people are valuing long lasting, high quality,
everyday products that they feel emotionally connected to.
As consumers are developing an emotional attachment
to everyday products, successful brands would benefit from.
reconnecting with their “soul.”
Mood board series “Connected Living” (top) and
“The New Normal” (bottom) were created based
on emerging macro trends, illustrating the link
between macro trends and CMF palettes. They
provided inspiration and guidance on how to
use the new CMF palettes within BlackBerry®
design teams. They were presented as posters
and brochures for easy communication. Trend
research, story boards and physical mood
boards by Janice De Jong, Blackberry® and
Studio Liliana Becerra Inc.
46
CMF CREATION
implementation of products. They can be digital (image based), physical
(object based) or a combination of both digital and physical, as long
as the information needed to further create a CMF palette is clearly
articulated.
The key to a good mood board for CMF design, is to find or create
the right visuals, images or objects needed to define the visual design
language, style and other aesthetic elements such as colours, textures,
surfaces and materials, in order to support a cohesive message. It is usu-
ally very hard to find the right images for a mood board. In fact, in some
cases it is a good practice to create and photograph images specifically
for it as part of the process — off course if time and budget allow for it.
As a rule of thumb a mood board should loosely include the visualiza-
tions of the following elements: the consumer target/persona including
hobbies and aspirations, the environments in which the product will
live (interior or exterior) and three or more products that are already
part of the persona’s physical life. The specific content of a mood board
will depend on the type of products being designed and the amount of
information required in order to convey a clear message, usually less
and precise is more.
Regardless of the order of the images and elements, if we are
designing the same product for different consumer segments or users,
all the mood boards should have exactly the same components and
ideally, the same layout so that it is easier to visually compare and dif-
ferentiate the look and feel for each. Basically, by having the same mood
board layout and content for different consumer segments, we will be
able to compare “apples to apples” and appreciate the differences and
similarities between them.
STEP 3 CREATING A CMF STRATEGY
A CMF strategy carefully considers how users relate to products
through a series of touch points: from the first interaction to the long-
term usability, and ultimately the product re-purchase.
The CMF Indicator
The CMF indicator is a thinking tool that | created to guide CMF projects
through the creation of palettes and their corresponding design strategy.
It’s recommended to be used at the very beginning of the process when
the overall ideation starts. Although there are several existing qualistic
tools to position and map out sensorial and functional attributes of
products, the CMF indicator presents a simplified way of understanding
and leveraging both.
47
CMF DESIGN
Using the CMF indicator is simple: every sample should go through a
qualification process either as a functional or as an emotional element
(or as both) in order to understand what is required in terms of effect,
functionality and emotionality.
Functional Attributes
The left side of the CMF Indicator comprises the more rational elements
and characteristics of design, defined here as the functional attributes.
By definition, they tend to have a more permanent nature, represented by
tangible, quantifiable measures, as well as by technical and physical per-
formance requirements involving properties such as: durability, rigidity,
flexibility and strength.
Durability involves choosing a material or a finish based on how long
the product is expected to last and planning how it will age and/or wear
off throughout time. Longevity and beautiful ageing are characteristics
that make certain materials — like leather or metals — more desirable than
others. If on the contrary, a shorter life span is expected of a product,
attributes such as easy discarding and recycling are key, prompting the
use of easy recycling materials and practical material combination/con-
struction methods.
Although these two are opposite characteristics, they are very
related. The more flexible a material or surface, the less rigid it will be.
This is important because depending on the required functional proper-
ties of a product; materials are expected to have certain level of both.
Flexible materials, such as rubber or elastomers for example, allow
for shape recovery after stress has been applied to them and because of
this, they tend to be more forgiving when it comes to withstanding dents
and scratches. Rigid materials such as glass or brittle plastics on the other
hand, are more prone to breakage despite presenting a solid surface.
Both materials’ properties — rigidity and flexibility —- can be increased
or decreased through fabrication processes or through the application
finishes such as soft touch for paint or plastic and anti-shatter coatings
for glass.
Different materials can withstand different levels of applied forces or
efforts. Strength is important, especially for products requiring high-per-
formance resistance against wear and tear, strong sudden impact and
other forms of physical pressure. A material’s strength is directly related
to its expected useful life as most consumer products are expected to
break at some point or another.
The traditional visual perception of strength is currently shifting.
Visual strength used to be connected with heavy and robust materials,
because of their structural resistance to wear and tear. With current
developments of material technologies involving super formulations of
light carbon composites or materials engineered at a Nano level, struc-
48
CMF CREATION
THE C/M/F INDICATOR
CMF DESIGN
Contents of the tool bag that resulted from
the partnership of Barbara’s Way’s and Stanley
Tools. The tools were designed with suitable
ergonomics for female body dimensions and a
target consumer driven CMF design strategy.
50
CMF CREATION
tural surfaces of products are increasingly becoming thinner, lighter and
stronger, deceiving preconceived visual aesthetics.
Emotional Attributes
Emotional attributes tend to have a more flexible or changing nature
depending on external influences, emotional values and ever-changing
market trends. They correspond to qualitative facts involving aspirational
and evocative elements. Some of their attributes involve adjectives
such as classic, contemporary, active, youthful, luxurious, etc. All these
concepts are based on an external perception of how materials present
a story and tend to change and evolve over time, depending on many
influences.
In most cases, the emotional attributes of products are not achieved
only with the selection of one colour, one material or a specific finish
effect, but rather through the combination of all of them together with the
final product and marketing strategy. Many elements have to converge
when it comes to creating highly emotional products, which is why work-
ing hand in hand with experts from different disciplines is so important.
Neutral Attributes
Some attributes are neutral because they can be adjusted to be highly
functional or highly emotional, depending on product requirements.
Among them are tactility and comfort, but there can be more depending
on the type of industry and product.
The human ability to touch and feel a material is a fundamental aspect
of CMF design. Tactility can enhance the visual appearance of a product
and simultaneously support its functionality. In many cases, tactility is
an inherent characteristic of a material or a surface — like the softness
of cotton and silk. Tactility can also be an “added” property, achieved
through different finishing processes, such as sand blasting for glass or
pattern stamping for metal.
Because tactility is all about interactivity and responsiveness of a
surface to the touch, it is key to specify the right tactility properties
expected of a material during the design of a product. For example, if a
surface is expected to provide a good grip to the user, its tactility should
be rugged and non-slippery. If the goal is to create a warm and comfort-
able surface, the tactility of the materials should be soft, slightly flexible
and inviting to the touch.
Comfort is a required property for most products, but especially
those designed to be in close contact with the human body or with the
skin. In industries like medical goods, wearable electronics, apparel,
automotive and aircraft design, a high level of comfort provided by the
materials is expected. Depending on the application however, materials
must provide users with high-performance properties as well. Textiles for
51
CMF DESIGN
instance, are utilized in these industries because, beyond providing com-
fort, they can comply with specific regulations and requirements, such as
fire retardancy, water resistance, breathability and acoustic isolation.
‘EP 4 UNDERSTANDING PART BREAK UP
In order to optimize the product benefits through performance and
usability, designing CMF part break ups should go hand in hand with
design for manufacturing. The material selection should be done at
the beginning of the product design process and not in isolation.
Ideally, part breakups should go beyond simple aesthetic styling of
products, and into value propositions that users can recognize intuitively
through universal cues. For example, if a colour and material variation is
expected of a part — such as a handle or a grip — it should be designed
with this functionality in mind and in a material that offers the possibility
for multiple colour and texture variations.
A good example of products with intuitive appeal created through
visual and physical part break up are utility tools, since their value resides
mostly on their functional performance. They are often brightly coloured
so that they stand out from their surroundings — usually construction sites
— and their functional parts, such as grip areas, are often emphasized
through texture and non-slip materials like rubber or silicone.
Besides the intended product functionality, part break up can also be
a driver or a consequence of the manufacturing processes. In fact, this
approach is currently growing in product design; bringing an entire range
of opportunities and constrains. Especially when thinking of the entire life
cycle of a product — design for disassembly — or when maximizing manu-
facturing processed and design functionality.
Permanent Versus Flexible Elements
Part break up can also be utilized as a way of moving products up or
down different market price points and consumer segmentation tiers.
When products are created with this purpose in mind, there are certain
elements designed to be permanent and certain elements designed to be
flexible or upgradable through different CMF variants.
The metal chassis of a mobile device, which is also designed to be
visible as an external frame detail, is an example of a permanent element.
It will repeat itself in all the products of the same range. The covers or the
different protective case colours and other smaller parts, are designed for
colour and finish variations allowing for product personalization and for
an extended portfolio offering.
52
CMF CREATION
Within the flexible elements, some CMF variants will be considered
entry level. In most cases these are gender or age neutral colours such
as black, grey or silver and low cost materials like plastic, elastomer or
silicone. The broad appeal of these elements makes the products easier
to mass-produce and therefore, readily available in higher volumes to
mainstream consumers, at lower price points.
Other flexible variants are regarded to be more exclusive. This is the
case with special or limited CMF editions that could include expensive
manufacturing techniques or handcrafted details that are impossible to
replicate. The focused appeal of these elements makes products more
expensive to manufacture and therefore coveted by premium or luxury
consumers.
Some material finishing technologies are specifically created to
instantly elevate the value of common materials, such as plating for
instance. This process provides surfaces with a thin, reflective, met-
al-looking coating which can elevate the perception of value without
adding much extra weight to the treated surface.
As there are many different functional benefits and challenges to
every material finishing technology, the last section of this book, Finish
Design, is completely dedicated to them.
The Giro Reverb urban riding helmet was taken
apart to visualize its materialasn d part break
up. The light, yet tough, in-mould shell wraps
around to the inside of the helmet to resist dents
and dings, while a self-adjusting fit system elim-
inates the need to dial in the fit when wearing
a cycling or winter cap. The finishing touch is a
simple and removable visor that adds a touch of
style without compromising cooling ventilation
in changing weather.
53
CMF DESIGN
These photos show, from top to bottom,
the first, second and third read visual design
elements of the Audi A8.
54
CMF CREATION
Establishing First, Second and Third Read
To create a compelling strategy for a CMF palette, it is useful to begin by
organizing samples according to first, second and third read elements,
keeping in mind that these are different in every product and industry.
Sometimes the first read corresponds to the main area or the most
visible surface we can identify from a considerable distance. In a car for
example, the first read is identified as the exterior colour, the size and the
overall shape or silhouette. In CMF driven product innovation, the first
read will be the material technology and its finishing effect, especially
when it makes a strong and iconic visual statement. Some examples
include novelty and unconventional surface finishes of high-end cars,
which are either completely matte or completely mirrored and therefore
uncommon and special.
In most cases, the second read corresponds to the surfacing elements
and functional parts, which are normally integrated to the main form.
These are generally medium-sized parts that require a closer look in
order to be discovered by the end user after interacting with the product.
In consumer products, these could be the operating keys and buttons
and the touch and feel of them. Second read elements could also be the
finishing, colouring effects or texturing details of the main surfaces. If
they are painted for instance, the second read will be the effect of the
paint — glossy or matte, metallic flake or pearlescent effect, etc.
Usually, the third read corresponds to specific details of the product
including borders, trims and accents, which are there to emphasize the
functionality or form or simply to elevate the perceived value of the prod-
uct. These details are of particular importance for high-end and premium
products as they represent the extra time and level of craftsmanship
invested in it. Some examples of third read elements are stitched, per-
forated or piping details of car seats or etched perforations on metal
surfaces designed to provide illumination, enhance sound or to improve
the grip in consumer electronic devices. Sometimes in entry product cat-
egories, normally the lowest product tier, third read elements are skipped
in order to achieve lower production costs. A high-end auto interior for
instance, will have as third read elements the hand-embroidered logo in
each of the leather seats. A low-end car interior on the other hand will
most likely use a synthetic material like polyurethane instead of leather,
with a factory-printed logo on the seats.
Personalized details and third read elements can provide what is called
the “added value” of a product. There is a large after market industry
focused on personalizing and upgrading products based on CMF details,
such as golden brand logos of cars or handcrafted inscriptions for watches
and other small accessories. Tom Davis eyewear for instance, offers bespoke
eyewear solutions by letting clients select their own CMF design elements
and by adding a hand-made inscription with their name in the frame.
55
CMF DESIGN
Logs are created from newspapers and
then cut, resulting in layers of a material
resembling actual wood. NewspaperWood
forms the basis of several products including
the handmade jewellery Sample Series,
developed by rENs together with Vij5. The
details of the pattern are carefully balanced
within the circular space of the pendants.
Scale and Proportion
In terms of surface decoration, the scale and distribution of the patterns,
textures and overall composition must be proportionate to the size of
the object. An oversized pattern over a small object will make it look
unresolved and will therefore lower its perceived and real value. The
more intricate the surface detailing and part break up differentiation
is, the higher the perceived and real value of a product. In the watch
and fine jewellery industry, a handcrafted approach to manufacturing
with extreme attention to detail elevates the rarity and exclusivity of the
products. This does not necessarily mean that small surfaces should be
crowded with decoration but rather that the composition of the different
elements involving colours, materials and textures should be well thought
out in order to make the product look good as a whole, as well as in its
specific details.
56
CMF CREATION
STEP S CREATING CMF PALETTES
A CMF palette is the physical collection of samples or tangible rep-
resentations of colour, material and finish corresponding the each
of the product parts. Depending on the level of complexity of the
product, palettes can vary in size and overall level of detail and com-
plexity. Designing CMF palettes is a process that goes beyond simply
picking colour and material samples though. It must be supported by
a cohesive and applicable design strategy.
Detail of a CMF palette targeting a collection
of airplane seat covers, showcasing different
materials with their corresponding samples and
numbered specifications. Project by Studio
Liliana Becerra Inc. for Zodiac Aerospace.
57
CMF DESIGN
A good palette should include and carefully present all the necessary
information to clearly communicate and articulate the new design pro-
posals. In most cases, CMF palettes are a combination of a digital docu-
ment and a physical display. Key essential elements are the mood board/
persona combination, keywords describing the sensorial and functional
CMF attributes, physical samples and the digital or physical visualizations
of the proposed designs with their corresponding part break up callouts
properly numbered and clearly listed.
Establishing Keywords
The process of creating a successful palette begins by generating a series
of keywords or verbal attributes to support the product narrative and its
functional characteristics. Normally for every CMF variant that is pro-
posed, a separate palette is required. The keywords can be organized by
using the CMF indicator, from the functional to the sensorial side of the
spectrum. It is recommended to use actual dictionaries in order to select
the right verbal attributes needed to communicate and further guide the
process. Linguistics and CMF design support one another. It is important
however to keep in mind that meanings and associations of descriptive
words and visual elements can vary from culture to culture and from
product to product and that each industry has its own technical terminol-
ogy or jargon when it comes to CMF attributes.
Defining the Part Break Up
The next step is to analyse the part break up of the product (see part
break up section) in order to see how many actual parts there are and how
many different colours, materials or finishes need to be specified. Since
this can be a complex process, it helps to number each of the parts to be
specified and to organize them either under permanent/fixed elements
or under first, second or third read. It often helps to request an expanded
view with all the external parts from the industrial designers or the prod-
uct engineers as well as orthographic views of the products (front, back,
sides, top and bottom), in order to begin the CMF exploration.
Ideally, each of the parts that will change colour or material should
be isolated in a separate digital layer. Design programs like KeyShot can
render parts of a product in different layers which can later be opened in
Adobe Photoshop to be visualized and worked on individually. In terms of
computer programs specifically for visualizing colour, material and finish
in a realistic way, RTT’s Deltagen and Autodesk’s Showcase software
programs are also good choices.
Inspirational Samples Versus Standardized Guidelines
Following the keywords and the established part break up, the next step
of the process is to start gathering samples of colours, materials and
58
CMF CREATION
finishes. When creating an initial and more inspirational palette, the
samples can come from any source. They can be actual objects, existing
material explorations, intriguing surfaces, novelty colours or material
effects, interesting surface treatments, etc. However, as the palette
becomes more grounded on tangible manufacturing technologies, there
are standardized guidelines and references to use and follow.
Within large organizations, in order to shorten and maximize produc-
tion time, it is recommended to obtain and utilize samples from current
suppliers, already pre-approved for mass production. For this purposes,
companies with internal CMF design teams build and populate their own
internal materials library on a constant basis, cataloguing both inspira-
tional and manufactured CMF samples, to be referenced quickly and
accurately, depending on project needs. In most cases, every material
sample is connected to a supplier.
Existing standardized references systems include Pantone® and
NCS® (Natural Colour System) for colours, Mold-Tech plates for plastic
textures and the German VDI (Verein Deutscher Ingenieure) scale for
surface texture determination, amongst many others. Every material and
finish industry has their own guidelines and standards. It is crucial to work
hand in hand with the suppliers when ideating a CMF Palette in order to
get a sense of what is possible to achieve within the given project brief
and the most immediate manufacturing constrains
Mold-Tech surface texture guidelines for plastic
surfaces and Pantone books with colour chips
for printing and paint.
59
CMF DESIGN
A“[$OSO20FU2e |O3q SUI|g|N \O7D
Clarity Chair digital visualization. The colour
bars — not part of the digital configurator — are
a useful CMF design tool when it comes to vis-
ualizing potential combinations of the different
CMF components.
60
7 A ,
CMF CREATION
Physical vieuzlizetion study of colour, meterial
and texture compositions targeting small con-
turner electronics. Although the form remains
constant, the material varies, creating difteren-
tiztion and exploring different material p2irings.
Project by Liliane Becerra inc. for Nokia.
Product Visualizations and CMF Harmonies
The process of visualizing different palette options goes hand in hand
yiith the creation of CMF harmonies. These are defined as horizontal
or vertical composition bars epeerrnnee the overall distribution and
ombination proportion of colours, materials and/or finish, according to
the product part break up. The CMF break up of the harmonies should
correspond directly with the first, second and third read or the fixed and
permanent elements of the products. It is important to visualize different
harmonies within the product itself before committing to a final design,
as physical material and colour samples might look good together over a
work bench, but completely different when applied to the product itself,
in different compositions and distributions. It is never recommended to
decide on 2 colour or material combination without first visualizing it
either digitally or physically, on the product.
Product visualizations can also be physical “appearance models” or
prototypes. Although there are currently very good computer programs
capable to create very accurate and realistic tri-dimensional product
Visualization with corresponding colour and materials variants, creating
ph— prototypes is highly recommended, especially when products
nave — forms and detailed part break ups. They will give a more
rea istic nse of scale, composition, look and feel.
The prh eeca l proto otypes ayn ot need to be completely accurate in
terms of detail level as long as they are able to gather and communicate
61
CMF DESIGN
the overall form gesture and look and feel of the design. The materials
utilized for the physical models can either be the actual final materials ora
simulation that gives a close indication of how the final product aesthetics.
The process of digitally visualizing products before committing to a final
design, has also become a point of sale tool for companies that offer
mass-customization of their products on line, by offering the possibility
of mixing and matching different colours, materials and finishes. The
different designs of the Clarity Chair by Allsteel were created through the
Clarity Configurator digital tool available on their website.
CMEF/ DEVELOPMENT
CMF Development brings together ideation and execution of design
concepts through the application of different material technologies.
The development phase is where the real possibilities of design and
innovation are tested, approved and finally included into new mass
production runs.
Creating Technical CMF Specifications
Once the CMF palettes have been decided upon, the process of devel-
opment begins by identifying which suppliers will be developing pre-pro-
duction samples according to the new designs. The amount of samples
to be developed depends on the complexity of the proposed CMF design
elements. As a general rule the higher the number of colours, materials or
finishes to be developed, the higher the number of vendors and suppliers
that will be involved. Suppliers of different materials and technologies
tend to work separately yet simultaneously and in order to properly
manage this process, it is recommended to create an accurate and clear
technical specifications document for each supplier.
A CMF spec (short for specification) is the most commonly utilized
visual and written technical specification document created by designers
to guide suppliers through the development of the task at hand. The
CMF spec normally consists on an exploded view of the product’s ele-
ments — created in CAD — with the corresponding callouts and numbers
per part. The most commonly and easy to use type of visualization is an
orthographic view — a two-dimensional drawing describing a three-di-
mensional object — presenting in one single page the front, back, top,
bottom and the sides views of the product. The more specific the infor-
mation in the CMF spec is, the clearer it will be for the manufacturer to
understand and execute the task.
Each of the call outs should include the name and number of the
part, the description of the type of development needed for it and the
62
CMF CREATION
target sample, which is the visual and tactile reference to be matched.
It is always recommended to include a target sample with the supplier’s
spec and to keep a duplicate sample as a reference to check back on the
results once the development is done.
Some of the descriptions of the development needed for the differ-
ent parts can include aspects such as the type of material (resin, wood
veneer, metal, etc.), the gloss level (satin, mate, glossy), the type of finish
(brushed, sandblasted, polished for metal), and so on. CMF specs tend to
be complex documents that take time to be created and require a lot of
attention to be prepared. Good managing, planning and organizing skills
are definitely a plus at this stage of the process.
Briefing and Working with Suppliers
Once the CMF specs are done, the next step is to brief the suppliers
and make sure that the request is realistic, more specifically, that the
requested colour or finish effect can in fact be achieved with the spec-
ified materials. There will always be adjustments needed in order to
accommodate the manufacturing process and a great deal of compromis-
ing while working back and forth with suppliers. Usually the first loop of
development is not satisfying, and that is normal. Working with suppliers
and manufacturers should be seen as a process of trial and error where
new opportunities and restrictions are discovered along the way.
In terms of CMF development time frames, it is recommended to
calculate for about three loops of sample matching until a satisfactory
outcome can be approved for mass production. Product innovation within
CMF design truly resides in the accurate allocation of time and resources
for R&D, especially when development time and costs are not underes-
timated or under planned. In general, the more time allocated for CMF
Development the more innovative the results will be.
PbDYihyaco meta og uchi
A professional is revising colour and finish
samples provided by a paint supplier, based
on a target sample request.
63

a ,C olour Des e
As Sie
CMF DESIGN
FUNCTIONAL
ATTRIBUTES
OF COLOURS
Besides being a universal language
based on perceptions and emotions,
colour has important functional
attributes that can improve product
perception, performance and usability.
66

CMF DESIGN
COLOUR AFFINITY
There are important external factors that come into play when working
with colours, one of them — which is often under estimated — is one’s
ability to see colour and differentiate tonality nuances.
Working in the area of colour design — either digitally or physically
— requires to have good colour affinity. Beyond a well-trained sense of
colour composition, professionals working in this area should be aware of
their capacity to discriminate colour differences and tonality nuances.
The lack of colour affinity is a common physiological condition known
as colour blindness, which affects approximately 10% of men and 1 in 200
women — accounting for approximately 350 million people around the
world.
People with colour blindness or in better words, colour vision defi-
ciency, are only able to see a narrower colour spectrum than people with
regular vision. There are different kinds of colour blindness — red blind-
ness, blue blindness and green blindness — and different types of tests to
find out if you have any type of colour discrimination deficiency.
Colour Arrangement Test
The most commonly used colour blindness tests are based on hue dis-
crimination or arrangement. The D-15 dichotomous test was introduced
Detail of the Ishihara colour deficiency test.
68
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOURS
by Farnsworth in 1947 and was the precursor of modern day colour
arrangement tests. The taker of the test has to arrange 15 coloured plates
in the correct order. The Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue test, which has
been used by the government and the industry for over 40 years, consists
of four trays containing 85 removable colour chips to be arranged in pro-
gressive incremental order, spanning the visible spectrum. Colour blind
people will arrange several or most colours in the wrong order. Colour
discrimination test are also available in digital formats, but factors such as
computer settings and ambient light can alter the results.
Ishihara Plates Test
The Ishihara plates test was introduced in Japan by Dr. Shinobu Ishihara
in 1917, aiming to evaluate primarily red-green colour blindness. The test
consists of 38 different graphs or plates that feature circles made out of
coloured dots. Each of them contains a number or a line that is only visi-
ble to either individuals with colour vision defect or to those with normal
vision. This test is available in printed and digital format.
DARKS AND LIGHTS
Not all shapes and colours go together. Colours can enhance or dimin-
ish the form they are applied to. In general colours should be used to
make forms stand out in the best possible light.
Darks
When Coco Chanel created the Little Black Dress back in the 1920s, she
intended for it to be long-lasting, versatile and accessible to the widest
market possible. All of that in a neutral colour. The main feature of black
and darker tones in general is that they can make objects appear to be
smaller and slimmer than they actually are, while accentuating the overall
form or silhouette.
These principles are not only applicable to the human body and
to fashion but also to all forms and shapes. When applied to product
surfaces, in most cases dark tones create an instantly slimming effect.
Utilizing gradation effects from lighter to darker with shades of grey will
also help create the illusion of tapering edges or rounding forms.
The downside of surfaces with darker tones is that they reveal dust
and scratches more obviously than surfaces with lighter tones.
Moreover, if the dark surface has a glossy or highly polished finish,
it will reveal oil marks from fingerprints, unless coated with anti-scratch
or oleo-phobic finishes.
69
CMF DESIGN
Lights
Lighter tones tend to reflect back light and therefore bring out little
details of a surface including its defects. They have the opposite effect
of dark tones; as they reflect more light, they make objects appear to be
larger than they really are.
When it comes to dust and scratches however, lighter tones tend to
hide them or absorb them better than darker tones. Functionally, white
and lighter tones have some positive connotations such as conveying
In products with similar or equal form, it is
possible to appreciate the slimming effect
of dark colours versus the widening effect of
lighter ones.
70
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOURS
the feeling of cleanliness and peacefulness. They visually help unclutter
surfaces and spaces, making them look more organized.
; In typography and graphics, managing the “white space” is quite an
important attribute for design, as it actually helps with readability and
to convey stronger messages. In interior design, white is connected with
modernism and creating white spaces can help to achieve a clean and
contemporary environment where other elements can stand out.
QUIET & LOUD
Colour combinations are essential when it comes to triggering dif-
ferent responses in the users and supporting the creation of visual
languages. Just as product categories have different market cycles,
the same is true for colour combinations.
Neutral tones (Quit)
Neutral tones, including shades of grey and other low-saturated colours,
tend to provide a calmer and more classic look, which is also longer
lasting. Although neutral tones are also influenced by trends, they don’t
necessarily fall into fast-paced fads but instead provide a longer and more
durable aesthetic. Neutral tones are ideal for products intending to be in
use for longer periods of time or for classic timeless objects.
Combinations of neutral tones tend to have a lower contrast than
those achieved with brighter or vivid tones. Utilizing lower colour contrast
in CMF design allows for the exploration of other surface treatments and
construction elements such as textures, trims and other visual effects. In
the case of premium products, elements such as tone on tone stitching or
tone on tone surface contrast help to convey the perception of exclusivity
and high craftsmanship.
Neutral tones with highly refined treatments such as pearlescent or
metallic effects are associated with precious metals even when these
effects are applied to plastic or other low cost materials. This is why
metal plating is considered a very successful finishing technology. It
elevates the perceived value of ordinary materials and products through
the creation of sophisticated metal-looking surfaces.
When product manufacturers have low budgets to renew their colour
offering, or when they simply want the products to appeal to a larger
group of users, neutral tones are the preferred choice, as they are ideal
when it comes to creating a timeless product portfolio. Interestingly,
neutral tones are often preferred by wealthier and more mature markets
where consumers are more interested in handing down products from
one generation to the next.
71
CMF DESIGN
Mirror-finished trainers with bright laces
contrast beautifully with the grey asphalt.
A4eoq,9p 0|n4qedO| pDl e5
Fluorescents and Brights (Loud)
A combination of vibrant and vivid tones can produce a dynamic and
expressive colour composition. Neon-inspired colours and bright tones
are normally perceived to be more playful and therefore usually used in
younger consumer market segments.
Since brighter colour combinations create a higher level of contrast,
they also tend to become more memorable or iconic and therefore
have a shorter life span. Since the bright colour cycle moves faster and
renews itself more often, these colours are ideal for products that are
not intended to be long-lasting, such as product packaging, cosmetics
packaging, fast moving consumer goods or after-market accessories for
consumer electronics and mobile devices.
Opposite to neutral tones, bright colours are associated with lower
cost materials such as plastic, polyurethane, rubber and paint, which are
quick and easy to manufacture and to discard. In some cases though,
bright tones are utilized by premium or luxury product categories as trim
details (the stitching or piping for car seats) or as iconic branding ele-
ments for a special products or sports editions.
UZ
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOURS
Functionally, brighter tones are ideal for high performing products,
especially for functional sports categories such as cycling, running and
mountain climbing, and for utility categories such as home improvement
tools, emergency equipment, medical devices, etc. Bright colours allow
products to instantly stand out from their surroundings.
COLOUR CONVENTIONS
Colour conventions tend to be universal. From nature to man-made
symbols, these conventions are not dependent on seasonal trends.
Instead, universal colours are selected to be highly visible and to
convey clear informational messages.
Universal Colour Conventions
There are global colour conventions that are purely functional and very
important to keep in mind when utilizing colour to denote functionality
and designing practical product guidelines and functional parts. These
oCMNPcfeihoo igoulvutroaeotr l eA sDyD ,
COLO 2\c/
COLOr IdenkIFication SHSreMm
ColorADD enables the colour-blind to identify
colours based on five graphic symbols repre-
senting the three primary colours, black and :
white. By relating the symbols, the entire Colour Pencils based on ColorADD
colour pallet can be graphically identified. system.
73
CMF DESIGN
ColorADD representation for a
transportation system map.
A[‘$0e@s0GAN0 eIaBqOdIWNNW 0 \O |d0 D
Oe
conventions are independent of aesthetics or seasonal colour trends and
tend to be very standardized across cultures and countries.
A green traffic light means ‘go’, while in red it represents danger and
warns us to stop. In package design, poisonous or potentially harmful
materials are indicated by a black skull warning us of death. Utilitarian
outfits and tools for construction work are often created in bright,
non-complex colours such as green, orange or yellow, so that they stand
out from their surroundings and are easy to identify from a considerable
distance. Depending on the country, road signage is created by applying
different bright colours under a high-tech surface formed by tiny reflec-
tive glass beads in order to maximize the reflection and instant recogni-
tion of the colour once it is illuminated.
Created Conventions
When creating colour design for functional products such as medical
devices, it is possible to develop new functional conventions. As an exam-
ple, the insulin colour code chart created by the International Diabetes
Federation, was developed as a universal colour code based on Pantone
references, in order to denote similar preparations of insulin, regardless
of the manufacturer, to be placed on labels in order to avoid confusion in
74
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOURS
patients who need to buy insulin from different sources.
Created colour conventions are utilized by different industries such as
healthcare, food and beverage, city and urban planning, science, culture
and others. A very interesting case of universal colour conventions
translated into specific functionality, is the Colour Identification System
project ColorADD which translates the three primary colours blue (cyan),
yellow and red (magenta) and black and white into five visual symbols.
These symbols form the basis of a universal graphic code for people with
colour vision deficiency or colour blindness. Through the acquired knowl-
edge of the Colour Addition Theory taught in the early school years, the
symbols can be related and the entire colour pallet graphically identified.
The system aims to make colour identification and communication more
efficient, responsible and inclusive.
BRANDS AND COLOURS
Visual colour branding is an extensive practice involving tangible and
intangible elements to create iconic, functional and memorable brand
recognition. Colour is an important aspect of branding. It can be so
powerful that it can become a large part of the brand equity. While
some brands have been recognized for the use of iconic colours, like
the Coca-Cola red or the legendary Tiffany’s aqua green, other brands
seek to convey different emotional messages. In corporate branding,
dark blue is used to convey messages of trustworthiness, reliability
and seriousness.
Iconic Brand Innovation
An interesting use of colour for brand innovation can be seen when tradi-
tional brands with already existing branding colour, launch special edition
product series or new technologies designed to enhance the current
performance or usability. In this case the original branding elements such
as font and colour are preserved and enhanced with a colour accent to
signal the new innovation. Some examples include the Porsche e-Hybrid
logo, which presents a bright green glow behind the silver letters or, the
BMW i8, which uses a bright blue colour to highlight its logo and different
areas of the interior trims and accents.
Soft Colour
Besides the visual colour branding for brand logos and corporate identity,
which are intended to be perceived as a first read, there are also softer
and more subtle brand DNA aspects designed to be perceived slower as
the product is being discovered and utilized. Some examples include the
75
CMF DESIGN
Iconic brand innovation through colour
elements enhancing branding messages about
electrical efficiency in bright green for the
Porsche Cayenne e-Hybrid and bright blue
for the BMW is.
76
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOURS
Sephora and Pantone collaborated for a special
edition package of brushes in Tangerine Tango -
Pantone 17-1463, colour of the year 2012.
cGoAPcoufrmol toualidreyeutcracetr tise ozyn’ s
RV+o YiOHgd IS
| | \ | aVfnSSE yoO i feie H e 7n v ae
| SEPHORA + P gnA iN vT eO rN seE ”
accent colours utilized for the dashboard dials of the MINI Cooper, the
orange ambience glow present in all BMW interiors, the red trim accents
utilized in Audi interiors and the Mazda red signature exterior colour.
Functional Colour
Functional colour branding can also become iconic based on technical
know-how when it has been created to fulfil functional industry needs.
The iconic “glow in the dark” utilized in wrist watches, was initially
developed as “Luminor”. This isotope of tritium-based hydrogen was
created for the military and patented by the Italian watchmaker Panerai in
1949, becoming the trade-mark of the brand and later on, a visual colour
indicator of the “glow in the dark” functionality.
Wal
CMF DESIGN
COLOUR MEASURING TOOLS
The process of colour matching is affected by many different aspects
such as the type of pigments utilized, the selected method of applica-
tion and the base colour or surface texture of the substrate. A range
of measuring tools including digital colour readers, light booths and
colour correcting lighting can additionally support the process.
Digital Colour Reading
Colour readers are created based on the principle of a colourimeter,
which are scientific tools to measure the wavelengths of light. Portable
and digital colour readers are utilized to measure and match the colours
of various surfaces to a specific colour system, providing different colour
conversion values including CMYK and RGB.
New subscription-based business models have recently emerged,
revolving around digital colour readers paired with the process of colour
collecting, organizing, referencing and sharing supported by mobile apps.
Digital colour reading is expected to grow and expand in the areas of
product and environmental design, architecture, as well as in the residen-
tial and contract paint industry.
NCS (Natural Colour System) Colourpin®, for example, is a digital
colour reader that can be connected to a mobile device via Bluethooth®
and operated through an app. The pin measures an area with a 12 mm
diameter for one second through a measuring principle involving a LED
and a 16 grid filtered photo detector array. The app allows users to create
digital boards by pinning colours they encounter in different objects,
nature or environments. The pinned colours and boards can be saved into
a library or further edited and shared with other users.
Colour Matching
Different technologies are used to achieve the same colour on different
materials. Therefore, when different parts of a product are required to
match one colour sample, it is wise to initiate the process with the part
that represents the biggest challenge and then use its final approved
sample as a reference for the others. Certain colours and effects are more
difficult to achieve than others, depending on the type of material and the
nature of the pigment. White for instance, tends to be more translucent
or less opaque than other colours. These are important considerations
when deciding on the base colour of the substrate material. When apply-
ing light-coloured paint over a dark-coloured surface, the combination of
those two colours results in a greyer white rather than in a pure white.
Although Pantone colour chips are to be used as target samples, for
colour matching there is large consensus between professionals about
78
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOUR
The NCS Colourpin®.
SoCASNPbNCNNCApfBto-ahoBoyCryCC ,tl.ooll oSSsSNCAwpfRNitpuu 2ottocopanh io r eButsre0oCuouurCke itl bo1rea fereS rrsrhh4Sloldmm e tm o .i u ir®y l®crse ®am s®nt i c ioeonsn
the fact that different Pantone chips — even with the same number —
might look different due to sun damage or to the length of ownership
of the books. Therefore, in many cases, it is better to obtain a target a
sample that is created in the exact colour, material and finish effect that
is desired.
Light Booths
For colour development and colour matching decision making, there
are existing visual colour evaluation systems, normally known as colour
matching booths, which offer simulations of different lighting conditions
ranging from natural daylight and fluorescent, to ultraviolet. By examining
and comparing the developed colour sample with the target sample
under different light conditions, it is possible to achieve better and more
“S
CMF DESIGN
accurate colour matches. These booths are created based on interna-
tional standards for visual evaluation of colour that are used globally
across suppliers.
By nature, any colour will look different under varying lighting
conditions. The most common types of lights utilized to match different
colour samples are natural daylight and fluorescent. As a rule of thumb,
when a colour sample held at a 45-degree angle looks very similar to the
target sample under these two lights, the colour match can be considered
successful and the sample can be approved for production.
COL-OUR exhibition
In 2015, Luca Nichetto produced the COL-OUR exhibition in collabora-
tion with NCS Colour, De La Espada and Triton. The exhibition in Milan
showed how the furniture colours were defined for his brand Nichetto.
The starting point for the definition of the colour palettes was the Her-
barium, an ex-tensive research project by Massimo Gardone on natural
elements such as flowers and leaves. Thanks to the NCS Colourpin® and
the scientific method of Natural Colour System, Nichetto Studio was able
to extract a selection of colours from the Herbarium before dividing them
into three tonalities: warm, cold and neutral. Found on every continent
and not influenced by a temporary fashion trend, the colour palettes have
been applied to ma-terials and finishes including fabric, wood, stone and
lacquer surfaces.
80
FUNCTIONAL ATTRIBUTES OF COLOUR
SNGaoMPctifnaahou cdorsudh tdrsieotooit e nmtseooy
Designed by Luca Nichetto and manufac-
tured by De La Espada for the Nichetto
brand, the colours of the Stanley Sofa are
based on the on the Herbarium project.
81
CMF DESIGN
CULTURE AND CONTEXT
OF COLOURS
Colours are not independent of context.
They have a symbiotic relationship with
the events and experiences that form the
collective memory of the world.
82

CMF DESIGN
BLACK
Black is a neutral, authoritative colour that can evoke both positive and
negative emotions. It can create the feeling of sophistication and emp-
tiness at the same time: it can represent power and dignity as well as
pessimism and sadness. In colour psychology, black represents protection
from the outside world, and the concealing of emotions. Black is also a
classic neutral colour that people often wear to feel slimmer or to fit right
in. It is the colour of mourning in the west. The custom of wearing black,
non-decorative clothing for days of mourning goes back all the way to the
Roman Empire.
Black has mysterious effect on people — some people may feel intim-
idated by a person wearing black in either formal or casual occasions. It
is often associated with seduction and intrigue. It also has a submissive
quality to it, like a priest wearing black in order to feel faithfuland sub-
missive to God. In Western culture, black is represented as a colour of
power, danger, death and rebellion while in Eastern cultures black is seen
more as a symbol of wealth, elegance and prosperity.
DANGER
DEATH
MYSTERY
CONSERVATIVENESS
ELEGANCE
AUTHORITY
SUBMISSION
POWER
84
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
PERILOUS JUICE
Octopus ink
Cephalopods (squids, octopuses
and cuttlefish) have ink stored
inside an ink sac which they release
as an escape mechanism. The dark
pigment is released into the water
accompanied by a jet of water from
the siphon. Its dark colour is caused
by its main constituent, melanin.
Each species produces slightly
differently coloured inks; generally,
octopuses produce black ink, squid
ink is blue-black and cuttlefish ink is
brown. Modern use of cephalopod
ink is generally limited to cooking,
where it is used as a food colouring
and flavouring.
85
CMF DESIGN
WHITE
White is a crisp, neutral colour that encourages us to think more purely
and clearly. It is associated with cleanliness, decluttering and organizing.
In colour psychology, it is known as a colour of fresh starts and new cre-
ations, acting as a blank canvas. Many people associate the colour white
with innocence and youth, recalling a time when they were naive and
protected by their families. On the negative side, white can have a cold,
isolated feeling, as demonstrated in many medical offices and hospitals.
Since white is a combination of all colours, it is considered an
equalizer, often associated with fairness and neutrality. Western cultures
perceive white to be representative of purity and peace whereas Eastern
cultures believe it represents death, mourning and sadness, especially
in China, India and Africa. Even though the colour white may convey
feelings of isolation and coldness, it’s overall a clean, pure colour that can
brighten up a space and make way for the future.
PURITY
CLARITY
NEW BEGINNINGS
CREATIVITY
CLEANNESS
INNOCENCE
YOUTH
NEUTRALITY
86
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
FILLING GOODNESS
Rice
Rice is the most important food
for a great part of the world’s
population, especially in the ©
warmer climates. China is the
largest producer and consumer.
Rice is usually divided into long-,
medium-, and short-grained.
87
CMF DESIGN
RED
Red is a vibrant, stimulating colour associated with our basic instincts and
senses. While it represents love, passion and beauty in some cultures,
it can also represent anger, aggression and war. Red’s visual energy
promotes a need for action and assertiveness, mainly because it excites
our emotions. Physiologically, it activates the body and senses which can
result in increased blood pressure and heart rate if largely exposed to it.
Restaurants often use red because of its ability to stimulate one’s
appetite. While Western cultures see red as a representation of love,
warning and anger, Eastern cultures view red as the colour of prosperity,
beauty and good fortune, especially China.American cultures perceive
blue as a colour of sacrifice and mourning. In general, Western cultures
interpret blue as a colour of peace and trust, while Eastern cultures view
it as a colour of immortality and virtue.
FERTILITY
SEDUCTION
SEXUALITY
MARRIAGE
ANGER
AGGRESSION
APPETITE
PASSION
LOVE
88
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
PIPPIN’ HOT ICE
Red chili peppers
Spicy hot, pungent, intense taste
fruit from the Capsicum plant
originated in the Americas. The
substances that give chili peppers
their intensity when ingested or
applied topically are capsaicin
(8-methyI-N-vanillyl-6-nonena-
mide) and several related chemicals
collectively called capsaicinoids.
When consumed, capsaicinoids
bind with the pain receptors in the
mouth and throat responsible for
sensing heat. Once activated by
the capsaicinoids, these receptors
send a message to the brain that the
person has consumed something
hot. The brain responds to the
burning sensation by raising the
heart rate, increasing perspiration
and releasing endorphins.
89
CMF DESIGN
ORANGE
Orange is a warm, inviting colour that combines the physical energy
of red with the bright happiness of yellow. It represents adventure and
risk-taking and like red, it evokes confidence and enthusiasm. This is why
most sportsmen and thrill-seekers prefer orange apparel and accessories
for their professions and hobbies. Orange is also associated with sponta-
neity and encourages social communication, interaction, friendship and
communities.
Orange has a rejuvenating effect on people as it has a balanced
vitality to it. In Eastern cultures, orange is representative of happiness
and spirituality, whereas in Western cultures, it represents affordability
and optimism. More specifically, orange is often used for safety devices
in the United States. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) requires some construction equipment to be manufactured
in orange.
ENERGY
ADVENTURE
VITALITY
FRIENDSHIP
WARMTH
CONFIDENCE
90
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
CLEVER SNAP
Carrot
Carrot is a vegetable rich in
anti-oxidants and minerals. It
supports good vision, is a good
source of vitamin A and is used
to colour food. The carrot gets its
characteristic and bright orange
colour from £-carotene, and
lesser amounts of a-carotene and
y-carotene. A and f-carotenes are
partly metabolized into vitamin A
in humans. Carrot extracts are used
by poultry producers to improve
animal skin and alter the colour
of egg yolk. Overconsumption of
carrots can cause carotenosis, a4
benign condition in which the skin
turns orange.
91
CMF DESIGN
YELLOW
Yellow is a warm, bright colour that stimulates the mind and encourages
communication. It is known psychologically as the happiest colour in
the spectrum. It is said that it helps people to focus, aiding with deci-
sion-making and with clarity of ideas. Its close relation to the sun makes
yellow the best colour for representing enlightenment, happiness and
optimism.
Yellow can have a creative effect on some but generates anxiety in
others. While being mentally activating, yellow can also unearth a great
amount of confidence in someone. Some cultures find yellow to have
a negative meaning, like the Greek and the French, whom perceive it
to be related to sadness, envy and jealousy, respectively. In general,
yellow is perceived to represent happiness, cowardice and caution in the
Western culture, whereas it is perceived as sacred and imperial in most
Eastern cultures.
i
VITALITY
FRIENDSHIP
MIND-STIMULATION
CREATIVITY
CONFIDENCE
OPTIMISM
92
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
DON’T WORRY, BE CORNY
Corn
Corn, a large grain rich in antiox-
idants and carotenoids, is a good
source of fibre, which provides
digestive benefits. Maize is widely
cultivated throughout the world.
The United States produces 40% of
the world’s harvest while other top
‘producing countries include China,
Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, India,
France and Argentina.
93
CMF DESIGN
GREEN
Green is a cool, soothing colour that provides emotional and mental
balance. It is known to help people relax both mentally and physically, as
it is a soothing colour that can help with depression and anxiety. It is an
emotionally positive colour that is abundantly present on earth in nature.
As a combination of yellow and blue, green provides the mental sharp-
ness of yellow, along with the soothing calmness of blue.
Most Western cultures see green as the colour of luck and nature,
while most Eastern cultures see green as a sign of regeneration, hope and
fertility. The Japanese culture regards green as the colour of eternal life.
In general, green is a symbol of peace, rejuvenation and harmony, as
its abundant presence on Earth balances our mind, body and soul on a
daily basis.
NOURISHMENT
LUCK
ABUNDANCE
WEALTH
HOPE
PROSPERITY
POSITIVITY
NATURE
94
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
LUCKY LICK
Clover
Clover grows freely in abundant
crops. It fixes nitrogen and reduces
the need for synthetic fertilizers.
Clovers occasionally have leaves
with four leaflets, instead of the
usual three. These four-leaf clovers
are considered lucky. Clovers can
also have five, six, or more leaves,
but these are very rare. The record
for most leaves is 56, set on 10 May
2009. This beat the 21-leaf clover,
a record set in June 2008 by the
same man, who had also held the
prior record Guinness World Record
of 18.
95
CMF DESIGN
BLUE
Blue is a cool, calming colour that is connected with trust across cultures
as it is perceived as a reliable and responsible colour that exudes confi-
dence and trustworthiness. Most hues of blue evoke a sense of physical
and mental relaxation, providing inner peace, tranquillity and calmness.
Since blue is a safe colour, it is connected with devotion and religious
studies, as well as with authority. In fact, most banks, corporations and
brands use the colour blue to evoke a feeling of reassurance and reliabil-
ity to the customers. On the negative side, blue can also be perceived as
predictable, boring and conservative.
Blue has a stress-reducing effect on people mainly because it tends
to be orderly and sincere. It is a neutral colour that doesn’t like to draw
attention, and that may be why it’s the most dominant “favourite colour”
in the world. —*
lran perceives several hues of blue to signify paradise, while Central
American cultures perceive blue as a colour of sacrifice and mourning. In
general, Western cultures interpret blue as a colour of peace and trust,
while Eastern cultures view it as a colour of immortality and virtue.
KEY CULTURAL ASSOCIATIONS OF BLUE
COOL
TRUSTWORTHY
RELIABLE
CORPORATE
CALM
RELAXING
GENERIC
NEUTRAL
96
GRA GHE sup SPIES? OF CD L/P I9F4
1 1 OL
GOlY BT pti
OH SWI GPA? Vee
atte G AMA AD OPS PIG BAe
he i Awh aya A ARDS LA
bas wt fet, Hate he PPB
tymtite, i tt te Op De te
Ge COPOLL 6 PAELLSLPAET GL-
POLALAAI ALA, RROMD MY ir
LE BELLA RAD SRA A,
othe wise Ugg 8 ahaa
See Vb CAPRA BA AAA ee SDI
OH A NBAE SSAAA B,RT
VME 6 tte Ae SHAE GPA
414 CS (BA LOD GD OAS
pi Be Be 8 PP BEA RI IOES
STAG Mg, Ai t, A
salts & oT up! Die Ge
Has, Bae tant Pt ana
MELA 6 ATR ME ST OT, WE
ng S Ws it Aes
gills te vt ie hte OS
grapp e 1 bunaat ae
hte Ute CRA BA BAS GYRE
4 tewrt P at
WS
CMF DESIGN
PURPLE
Purple is a cool, uplifting colour with a sense of spirituality. It can calm the
mind and nerves, as well as encourage creativity. From a psychological
perspective, purple provides a link between thought and activity, offering
a sense of mental balance. As a combination of red and blue, it carries
the stimulation of red and the calmness and integrity of blue. Too much
purple however, can aggravate depression in some people. Purple’s con-
nection to spirituality also makes it related to the imagination and dreams
— it is known as an introspective colour that promotes enlightenment. Its
close relation and history to royalty and the nobility make purple also a
colour of luxury and wealth with regal, extravagant qualities to it.
Western cultures believe purple is a colour of royalty and spirituality,
while most Eastern cultures think purple is a colour of sorrow, wealth
and mourning. In Iran, purple is a colour of the future, while some Latin
American countries perceive it as the colour of death and mourning.
LUXURY
STATUS
ROYALTY
NOBILITY
CHURCH
ROMANCE
SPIRITUALITY
IMAGINATION
98
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
BEAT THE BOOST
Beets
A healthy root vegetable rich in
antioxidants and nutrients that
helps prevent blood diseases. It
is rich in magnesium, sodium,
potassium, vitamin C, and betaine.
Betanin, obtained from the roots,
is used industrially as red food
colourant, to improve the colour
and flavour of tomato paste, sauces,
desserts, jams and jellies, ice cream,
sweets, breakfast cereals, etc.
99
CMF DESIGN
SILVER
Silver is a cool, metallic colour that is associated with the moon and the
feminine energy. Its illuminative quality implies that silver is a cleansing
colour that provides calmness and helps release mental and physical
stress. Silver has a reflective effect on people and is believed to draw
negative energy out of the body and replace it with positive energy. Its
metallic refinement makes it a livelier, sophisticated version of grey,
conveying elegant neutrality.
Eastern cultures, like the Japanese and Muslims, perceive silver to
represent intelligence and peace, respectively. In the Western world,
Native Americans believe silver to be a colour of agreement and truce.
In the contemporary world, silver is very versatile; being applied to both
high-tech electronics and elegant fashion garments. It is also associated
with wealth and prosperity, and more specifically to the professional and
corporate arena.
HIGH-TECH
REFLECTIVE
SLEEK
MODERN
COOL
FUTURISTIC
WEALTHY
LONG-LASTING
CLASSIC
100
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
INTERGALACTIC MIND
Edible silver foil (varaq)
Varaq is any foil layer of very pure
metal — typically silver — used for
garnishing sweets in South Asian
cuisine. The silver is edible, and
flavourless. The use of varaq is not
considered harmful to the body,
since the quantities involved in
normal use are minuscule. This
however is only true as long as the
foil contains only high purity silver.
101
CMF DESIGN
GOLD
Gold is a warm, metallic colour that represents wealth and prestige in
Both Western and Eastern cultures and in almost every country today.
Gold relates to masculinity and brings to mind the brightness and energy
of the sun, illuminating and radiating energy.
This colour is connected to yellow and brown, becoming a hybrid
of brightness and stability. Gold has traditionally been associated with
the riches of royalty around the world, what makes it closely related to
prosperity.
Although gold has a bright, cheerful quality to it, it can also be
perceived as traditional and not as modern as silver. It is connected to all
that is successful, triumphant and extravagant.
PRESTIGE
LUXURY
TRADITION
PROSPERITY
TRIUMPH
EXTRAVAGANCE
ENERGY
SUN POWER
102
CULTURE AND CONTEXT OF COLOURS
FLAMBOYANT REWARD
Gold leaf and sugar
Gold leaf is sometimes used to
decorate food or drink, typically
to promote a perception of luxury
and high value. It is usually found in
desserts and confectionery includ-
ing chocolates and mithai. In Asian
countries, gold is sometimes used in
fruit jelly snacks. It was also used in
coffee, particularly during Japanese
asset price bubble. In Kanazawa,
where Japan’s gold leaf production
was centered, gold leaf shops and
workshops sold green tea and hard
candy with gold leaf inside.
103
a cnay n
ae Hscp SnMHeLeean t eEegLeaay e eieileiaginst ie
naate
ra eae S "i
i‘tuii
eTe aaam eess ws ati ea : : ee et eekoa n
ih H
Waal
way a
aF eauPrnte yen d ema t
Thie
a
sy
aaahys arr aoqoe( ena
a
Material Design
CMF DESIGN
MATERIALS FIRST
Designing products around the
materials can lead to very creative
and often unexpected aesthetic
and functional solutions.

CMF DESIGN
MATERIAL COMBINATION STRATEGIES
There are different approaches when it comes to establishing and
creating CMF combination strategies. Most of them obey to general
principles of aesthetic and visual composition, while others are a
result of the materials design approach.
Pairing Materials
Besides specifying every single colour, material or finish as a separate
element, it is important to foresee how they will behave when assembled
together. Natural materials will want to expand and contract under differ-
ent environmental conditions such as humidity, heat or external elements.
Synthetic or man-made materials on the other hand, don’t necessarily
absorb humidity or allow water to penetrate and modify its structure.
Ideally, materials that go together should have similar physical properties.
When materials with different properties are assembled together, the
industrial design of the product could allow for the creation of gaps and
higher tolerances between materials and surfaces as a functional and
visual design element, in order to allow the two materials to expand or
contract independently.
A material pairing study explores the aesthetic and
functional potential of intersections between plastic and
metal. Project by Liliana Becerra for Nokia.
108
MATERIALS FIRST
The backbone of the Ago table, designed by
Alfredo Haberli for Alias, is clearly visible
through the glass top.
oAPSPbclfhthoyi uoou adttrsio otot e escyn ica,
Design for Disassembly
A great emphasis on material combination strategies has surged in recent
years for products designed to be “considerate” throughout their entire
life cycle by involving a strategy called “design for disassembly”. This
emerging key area for product and CMF design implies specifying the
different product parts and materials to be easily assembled and disas-
sembled for repair, refurbishing or recycling.
One of the greatest paradoxes of our times is that there are products
created to have a very short life span, yet manufactured with material
technologies that make them hard to recycle at the end of their useful
life. A good example of this paradox is a disposable toothbrush whose
different parts have been fused together through a co-moulding process.
Once different materials — like rubber and plastic in this case — have been
fused together, they behave as one single material with different prop-
erties: while the soft rubber provides the handle with a good grip, the
plastic provides the necessary rigidity to perform the brushing function.
The challenge arises when the bristles are worn out before the handle is,
and it is not possible to remove them and replace them as a single part.
Moreover, during the disposal process, recycling is ruled out due to the
contamination of the material stream with foreign particles.
One way for commingled products to have a second life is to grind
them up and use them as filler in asphalt and plastic timber. This
process is known as “down cycling” and is based on using a material
only for its filler and mass qualities and not for its inherent performance
characteristics.
There are several aesthetic and functional strategies utilized to create
products with disassembling in mind. Some of them involve the use of
109
CMF DESIGN
Based on the philosophy “design of reduction”,
the Clarity chair preserves only the essential
elements of form and function. A simplified
set of parts can be mechanically disassembled
allowing clear part separation between plastic
and aluminium components.
AA‘o34jqspe}O0 ee 0y9zqUesgud|u n} o\ovqo o y
connectors that snap together instead of using toxic glues which make
it impossible to recycle them. Another approach is to design the joints
of the products — such as screws or pins — to be visible design elements
instead of hidden details. This approach requires a lot of rigor in terms of
balancing out functional and aesthetic elements into one product. A good
example of this approach is the Ago table by Alfredo Haberli for Alias.
The different construction elements of the table are designed as visible
parts showcasing rather than hiding the joints where materials converge.
This design approach uses different materials on different parts not only
as an aesthetic element but also as a construction/deconstruction pro-
cess. According to the designer “his table concept is based on a pared-
down steel frame whose purpose is to secure the legs and support the
top. A supporting structure similar to a backbone, allows for an extremely
stable and visually light composition.”
110
MATERIALS FIRST
Material Design Drives Product and Form
There are a number of products where the functional and aesthetic
properties of a material provide at the same time form, function, colour
and finish of a product. This holistic approach to design does not consider
CMF design as a separate discipline but instead, integrates it into the de-
sign process to create smart product constructions. This approach is also
known as “materials-lead design” because the process begins by explor-
ing the properties of the material first, according to the targeted design
functionality. In the end product, the material influences the form and the
form is fully supported by the material.
A very interesting example of this design approach is the Membrane
chair by Benjamin Hubert for Classicon. This lounge chair comprises a
lightweight steel and aluminium framework with a stretched 3D woven
textile mesh. The chair weighs only 3 kg. The chair stems from the studio’s
materials-driven, process-led, industrial design approach, and research
into the construction of tents and sports products with a focus on space
frames and stretched textile. The chair utilizes a CNC-shaped stainless
steel and aluminium framework to describe its shape. This framework is
then wrapped in a 3D woven textile with integrated padding. The cover
is secured to the framework with a series of zips and fastenings. The
combination of the metal frame and padded textile allows this chair to
use a minimal amount of polyurethane foam (a conventional armchair
would be covered almost entirely with foam) and thus reducing the
carbon footprint.
PoBHcfhueo obnutejrorta tem siyn
The Membrane chair by Benjamin Hubert for
Classicon is a good example of a materials-lead
design process.
111
CMF DESIGN
MATERIAL DESIGN
BASED ON
SUSTAINABILITY
Thinking in terms of lifecycles — how
products will be assembled, used and
later on, discarded — greatly influences
the selection and combination of
materials.
2

CMF DESIGN
SUSTAINABLE MATERIAL DESIGN
WITH THE BMWI SERIES
Using new materials and discovering more sustainable processes, can
change the entire design approach as well as the final product.
Outline Structure
In the BMWi series, the innovation involves many aspects including
the selection of new materials with their corresponding manufacturing
processes and the design of new construction methods. As a result, this
approach is now the basis for the creation of a completely new visual and
functional design language, which is influencing the future of automotive
design altogether and redefines the meaning of performance, efficiency
and lightness. Most of its body is made of Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic
(CFRP). The interior space is optimized and opened up, creating airiness,
a reduction of unnecessary elements and a feeling of spaciousness.
During recent years, an interesting shift in the perception of surface
finishes for premium automotive interiors has emerged. Traditionally the
finish of materials was expected to be perfectly even and totally smooth
— both to the eye and to the touch — in order to guarantee the signature
Detail of the carbon fibre structure
of the BMW i3.
114
quality of the brand. This approach implied that the surf ality from
product to product had to be replicable in mass production. However,
building a product completely from scratch - as in the case of the BMWi
sub brand - provided the opportunity to rethink these concepts while
introducing a new appreciation Px r materials both from a structural and
from an aesthetic perspective. By utilizing more n
finishing processes, the interior surfaceSess yield h» ig" h® e a r< — s© ur= f “s a ® c e= v a) ~~ g rN Y ao ‘> ys QO.
larities, creatinga feeling of uniqueness, from one product to the next.
Wood Trim
Key aesthetic characteristics of wood include the great
uniqueness of growth grains and textures and the way it naturall
changes patination and colour as it evolves an o. a) © ® w _ In traditional
automotive interiors, wood trims are often covered with a thick, translu-
cent layer of glossy bien which protects the surface from scratches and
from transformations cau ed by external elements such as, water, light
and heat. This approach teo reating traditional wood trims for automotive
interiors is very clita rial and standardized.
Detail of the wood trim on the dashboard of the
BMW iz.
wn
CMF DESIGN
In the BMW i3, the natural characteristics of wood are highlighted and
emphasized in the dashboard trim made from Eucalyptus — a renewable
resource harvested 100% from responsible forestry. Here, the use of
natural substances for the finishing process help protect and at the same
time display the wood’s natural aesthetics and properties, including the
possibility to develop interesting patinas through time. A dark wood filler
is applied to accentuate the natural contrast of grain tones. This approach
to designing implies that, instead of forcing the wood into traditional
industrialized processes, a process was created to enhance the material's
unique aesthetic and natural properties.
Leather
Traditional leather tanning processes for automotive interiors focus on
achieving consistency of quality by ensuring that the thickness of the
material is the same throughout, the surface is regular and free from
blemishes and the colouration does not present any major variations from
piece to piece. This is often achieved through the process of chrome
tanning, which produces consistent results but tends to be very toxic.
Furthermore, in order to obtain hides of the finest quality without
surface regularities, they need to be sourced from places where the bulls
are rarely exposed to insects, avoiding scarring and bite marks. These
requirements often apply to high-end or premium applications of automo-
tive or aviation interiors and make the price of producing premium-quality
hides very costly.
What makes the leather approach for the BMWi series interesting
from a materials design perspective — besides the fact that it has been
organically tanned with olive leaf extracts — is that it creates a shift not
just in how leather is processed but also, in how it is perceived aestheti-
cally, when it comes to premium applications. The soft, comfortable and
inviting look and feel provided by the natural tanning process, is reminis-
cent of that of a leather surface of a comfortable vintage chair. The finish
welcomes slight patination through time and use, making the surfaces
even more special.
Kenaf Fibres
A new trend in materials design for automotive interiors is the use of bio
composites as visible design and styling elements. Utilizing natural fibers
in door panels or parts, saves 10-50% of the weight of traditional injection
moulded plastic derived from petrochemicals.
Traditionally, part of the aesthetic requirements for automotive inte-
riors within the premium category are interior panels fully upholstered
in leather or a combination of other high-end materials bonded or glued
together and placed over injection-moulded structural parts. This results
in extra weight and higher manufacturing costs.
116
CASE STUDY
“"
~ x, N
\
Seat detail of the BMW i8 showcasing
orange leather in composition with other
interior trim elements.
Seat detail of the BMW i3 showcasing
white leather in composition with other
interior trim elements.
NIZA
CMF DESIGN
The door panels are made with Kenaf fibres,
a renewable, raw material, and are left visible.
This decision is part of the entire CMF
composition of the BMW i3 interior,
118
CASE STUDY
In the BMWi series, the decision to not cover or laminate the door panels,
results in reduction of weight from unnecessary layers of materials and
on physical lightness provided by the use of natural fibres. Fibres from
the Kenaf plant fulfil functional requirements and provide a unique take
on premium aesthetic qualities. The fibres provide tactility and feelings of
cosiness and closeness to nature.
The Textiles
More and more automotive interiors are utilizing upholstery textiles
made from recycled content. A company called Unifi produces a sewable
material called Repreve. PET bottle flakes are turned into a fiber, which
is then used in fabrics. Sustainable Repreve fabrics have been utilized
by several brands including Ford in their car seats and Patagonia in their
high-performance fleeces. This practice, besides helping re-direct waste
from landfills into products, is quickly raising consumer expectations
when it comes to sustainable and functional textiles.
The fabric utilized in the interior of the i3 is made mostly from recy-
cled polyester. This is not a natural material but it is highly recyclable,
and when woven it offers a natural look and feel while providing all the
technical requirements needed for high performance.
The recycled polyester textile on a seat of the BMW
i3 contrasts with the natural coloured leather.
119
CMF DESIGN
SANDY MCGILL
For the past two decades Sandy McGill has split her time between Los
Angeles and Munich as a lead CMF designer. Sandy joined Design-
works, a BMW Group Company, in 1991 and her CMF work has been
reflected in all the BMW Group brands. Her first BMW program was
the colour and trim for the BMW E2 electric car, revealed at the Los
Angeles Auto Show. This was followed by a stint in the BMW colour
and trim studio in Munich during the development of the BMW E46
3 Series. Later she explored innovative material technologies for the
BMW GINA program. Sandy conceived the colour and trim for the
2003 re-launch of the Rolls-Royce Phantom. Her work for the first ever
MINI concept car debuted at the 2005 Frankfurt Auto Show. From
2003-2005, she was a member of the MINI design colour and trim
team working on the 2007 MINI Coupe R56. For Designworks’ external
clients, Sandy has developed CMF strategies for consumer, medical
and aviation industries. Moreover, Sandy designed a top-selling
carpet collection for Lees Carpet. Sandy’s latest foray is BMW Indi-
vidual where she is working with BMW customers to design the BMW
of their dreams.The many industries that Sandy created CMF designs
for include transportation, consumer products, medical/dental
equipment, industrial equipment, contract furnishings and household
cleaning products.
How do you define CMF design?
Marketing jargon definition: A CMF designer is like a fashion stylist to a
movie star but in the CMF designer’s case the star is a product such as
a Car, a private jet interior, or a smart phone. CMF designers design and
develop the colours, patterns and finishes that enliven these products.
Technical definition: CMF design is to design and develop the visible
materials, which surface a product or cover a substrate.
120
Q&A
Out of all the industries you designed for, was there a particular
one where you less expected to need CMF design?
| worked on an industrial printing press that had the width of a football
field — the kind that prints magazines and newspapers. The CMF design
was as important as that of a consumer product. The CMF underscored
the functionality, the product quality and the brand identity, which was
especially important when potential buyers saw the machine at a trade-
show or showroom.
Do you see a difference between the terms “colour and trim
design” and “colour, material and finish design”?
Colour and trim is the traditional term for automotive colour and surface
material design. For example, a car buyer chooses wheels and colour and
trim in the dealership. While that term was reserved for the automotive
industry, the term colour and material design referred to consumer prod-
ucts. The term “finish” was added later. Now colour, material and finish
(CMF) refers to designers working in a broad spectrum of industries.
| am at odds with the word “material” as it connotes material science
expertise. Typically CMF designers are aesthetic, right brain types with
only practical material science knowledge. The material science part
of the equation is achieved through working closely with chemists and
engineers. This collaboration is the most fulfilling part of CMF design —
harnessing the power of science and technology with the help of experts
to achieve an aesthetic vision. This may mean working with a chemist to
develop a new pigment, which results in a paint with a new visual effect
or acolour in a yet unachievable part of the spectrum.
Can you briefly describe BMW Individual and your role in it?
The BMW personalization program is called BMW Individual. It allows
customers to create a one of a kind BMW. Through either Individual
Collection or Individual Manufaktur. Customers can choose exceptional
colours, beyond the typical automotive colour vernacular, offered by the
Individual Collection; or a customer can give us an inspiration and we will
make their dream come true through Individual Manufaktur.
| am working with BMW customers and the BMW factory to design
and produce personalized BMWs. In fact, customers have the opportunity
to visit the BMW Group Designworks Studio to design their personal
BMW, imparting an extraordinary experience unlike any other in the lux-
ury automotive market. Visiting Designworks is akin to visiting the inner
sanctum of BMW Design where customers have access to the designers
and design tools to create their unique vehicle. The vehicle conception at
Designworks marks the beginning of the journey that ends with the BMW
Welt delivery in Munich for a comprehensive BMW Experience, from
conception to delivery.
121
CMF DESIGN
What percentage of CMF is used to personalize a vehicle interior
compared to other technical features?
Besides colour and trim, functional options are also available, including
customized beverage coolers and seat covers for dogs.
What are essential colours and materials that instantly make an
interior look and feel more premium?
Leather, and the amount of it, signifies the value of any automotive inte-
rior. Adding leather seats to a car immediately adds value. Manufacturers
are strategic about how they apply leather. Base model leather packages
only have leather seating surfaces while seat backs are polymer surfaces.
A higher cost upgrade offers the entire seat in leather. While even further
upgrades offer leather dashboards, door panels and centre consoles.
Moreover, contrast stitching, piping and quilting adds value to the leather
trim as it connotes craftsmanship and attention to detail.
Correlated to the amount of leather is the absence of plastic. No visi-
ble plastic is the ultimate in premium for a car, and anything else for that
matter. Plastic parts can be leather wrapped. Even the smallest air vent
louvers can be wrapped with leather that has been shaved to microns in
thickness.
As leather becomes more ubiquitous, metal, wood and carbon signify
premium. For example, the cool touch and weight of metal handles and
knobs reminds us of highly engineered, machined parts, communicating
superb functionality and longevity. In addition, natural wood imparts a
sense of class and craftsmanship. Recently, wood has received a modern
upgrade with metal details and intaglio. Moreover, carbon fibre trim has a
premium sport perception as it is used on competitive performance sport
cars, is an expensive raw material and is difficult to produce in finished
parts. Lately, precious metal fibres are added to carbon weaves creating
a luxury, sport impression.
Do the CMF selections vary according to regional preferences?
CMF selections are driven by context. Buyers choose colours based
on their comfort and familiarity with colours, which is gained through
exposure. For example, in heavily leafy green wooded areas like the
Northeastern United States, green cars are more popular as the colour
is a familiar one. In the winter time, the green car is reminiscent of the
colour lacking in the natural environment. By the same token, yellow cars
are popular in places where sunshine is lacking, such as Germany. On
the other hand, yellow cars are also popular in places where yellow is a
natural part of the environment, such as sunny climates. One is familiar
and comfortable with the colour or is seeking out the colour because of
its absence.
122
GEFs
and Chinas have a geste: Met on CMF colour preferences than gen-
dex, That said, women might weer more toward warmer, friendiier colours.
Generally, women have 2 big influence on car colour choices. Men
wil, more ten than not, ask 2 woman tor colour r ions.
A typical rest is that wien the car in question is an exotic sports car,
2 woman wih recommend the car in 2 bright colour as ift he car is the
tacts toy.
bre there sezsonal CMF trends when it comes to making an
interior feel luxurious and premiurn?
“Seasons of Wecycles AH cars are long: four to ten years. Car manufac-
tuxers Ses editions and tace#tts to add longevity to a vehicle design. The
motthcstiions ahuays involve coho and trum as the exterior paint and
lesthe: is relatively easy to change. BAA individual Manufaktur offered
an eition &f the 146 Gran Coupe with matte red exterior paint and whhite
lesthex. Both finishes are valued for thes perceived delicacy or vulnerabil-
ity to Ceantiness and wear. Adiding the finishing touch while taking 2 cue
from tashion accessories, this edition also had the Manufaktur signature
emblazoned on the door sill, in the décor trim and in the leather. Branding
details ove cise highly desirable in the luxury market
ai
123
CMF DESIGN
MATERIAL DESIGN
BASED ON
MANUFACTURING
PROCESS
Depending on the material, certain
manufacturing process can be more
suitable than others and offer a specific
range of possibilities for the creation of
form, surface finish or colour. It is key
then, to explore and understand each
material’s own aesthetic and functional
manufacturing potential.
124

CMF DESIGN
MACHINED ALUMINIUM WITH NEAL FEAY
With expert knowledge and the right amount of creativity, experimen-
tation and development, a material’s intrinsic properties can become
an integral part of the design process, fuelling the creation of truly
unique results.
Neal Feay, a company based in Santa Barbara, California, was founded by
Neal F. Rasmussen in 1945 during the post-World War II aluminium boom.
The company is a pioneer in the creation of high-end and sophisticated
aluminium products. Their innovative manufacturing processes include
selected multi-colour anodizing NFS and several refined techniques for
machining and working with aluminium.
A4xOq1aJe \0|yYg d
The CNC milled pattern with ball end mill is
followed by a selective anodizing process using
water based dye. Surface by Neal Feay.
126
Working with Alurninium
A key principle of designing with aluminium is understa anding what is
> Uli
possible to achieve based on how the material behaves both casera
through mechanical engineering, and practically, thro ough industria
design.
“We never work in a vacuum, we always think about the finishing,
before we work on the form. We never come up with a shape and
try to figure out how to finish it or how to make it, because we are
controlling the entire process, we have all of those little pieces of
the puzzle.”
Alex Rasmussen, President Neal Feay
inherent characteristics of aluminium itself,f such as luminosity, reflectiv-
ity, visual richness and physical lightness, yield a ‘2r ange of specciif ic look
and feel properties that are unique to the material. In the same manner
certain finishing processes are directly related to the way the mat2 erial is
manufactured. For example, only pure aluminium can be anodised so if
the base aluminium is not com30p letely pure or if it has its cast with other
U
alloying elements, it will not anodise properly and the colour and finish
of the final surface will be altered. In the case of Neal Feay,a highly pure
grade of aluminium is utilized for machining an initial slab which can be
sheet, plate, or extrusion.
PABbltryae oixrt o
Machined aluminium tray with intriguing
yolurne and surface texture. The form and
pattern were CNC milled and followed by
2 polish and black anodize. Design by Alex
Yzernussen, Neal Feay (Design Miami 2014).
CMF DESIGN
The textures on the machined aluminium wine
chillers are engraved in varying depths and are
inspired by the wind patterns of cold fronts as
they move around the globe. Designed by Joe
Doucet, crafted by Neal Feay.
A4xoq1Jee 0|}Ug d
IyyCe aEw
Different processes can be utilized to transform a solid piece into a
beautiful object with unique form, surface and finish. Machining alumin-
ium — a core expertise of Neal Feay — is a very reductive process, which
usually begins by taking solid stock of the material and cutting it away
with the appropriate tools. The selection of the right tooling for each form
is directly related to the surface texture and therefore to the desired finish
of the product or part.
“A lot of what we are doing with the surface texture is not a sep-
arate step from the form, it is completely integral to the form, so the
way we create the surface, is the way we create the form”
Alex Rasmussen
When a part is machined, it will automatically display the marks from the
cutting tool that was utilized to create it. These marks or steps need to
be blended out later on, especially if they visually create an un-finished
surface, which is too distracting or too reflective. Heavy circular machin-
128
CASE STUDY
ing marks for instance, create a sort of “optical illusion” surface effect and
make it difficult to appreciate the form. In these cases, post-machining
processes like sand blasting or bead blasting can be used to smoothen
the surface and blend out tooling marks, making it less reflective and the
form more prevalent.
The real genius of Neal Feay Company when it comes to materials
design, lays in the creation of the entire tooling process, in order to
produce beautifully refined surface textures that become at the same
time finishing elements and in some cases, final products. A big part of
the innovation in the tooling process has to do with what is affordable
at different levels. There is a direct correlation between machining time
versus cost of making a part. The key is to balance out the time needed to
create a part with enough surface richness, in a way that is proportionate
to the final cost. In general, the more refined and smooth the machined
ZPbAhyuno cdtkroee rwm an
The (RED) Desk was designed by Marc Newson
and Jony Ive for Bono’s RED charity auction
by Sotheby’s in 2013. One of the many reasons
why the desk was so unique and expensive to
make is that many of its parts, besides being
machined out of a single block of aluminium,
were polished and finished by hand. The desk
was produced by Neal Feay Studio.
129
CMF DESIGN
texture is, the longer it takes to create it but the less post-finish treat-
ments it will require. It is important to note however, that a surface with a
refined texture is still much cheaper to make than a polished surface or a
surface with no texture at all. Highly polished parts are hugely expensive
to make and are much more time consuming as they involve intense hand
polishing and handcrafting.
“There is a balance between how smooth we make a surface and
how long it takes to smooth it out. We look at how much machine time
versus how much finishing time, because we control both.”
Alex Rasmussen
Texture and Form
When it comes to working with material and texture alone, aluminium is
the perfect material as it is very sculptural and allows for purity of form.
Since the machining of aluminium can influence the form and_the surface
texture at the same time, the creation of surface effects that are part of
the form offer unique and very interesting possibilities of design.
A4xoq1e}el 0|¥Ugy d
Designed by Frederick McSwain and milled
from solid blocks of aluminium, Lift is a series
of containers that utilize texture, form, and
colour to induce a visual sense of movement.
Changing with the viewer’s perspective, the
syncopated pattern acts as a refractor of light
creating an optical illusion that rises and falls.
Produced by Neal Feay.
130
CASE STUDY
The form of the Squircle mirror
was emphasized and enhanced
by letting the actual machining
passes be clearly visible.
Designed by Holly Hunt Studio
and produced by Neal Feay.
PbAWhnyeog stitoe
131
CMF DESIGN
Finish and Form
A material finish can be used to enhance the form of an object. Alumin-
ium offers are rich variety of finishing possibilities beyond machining,
which are essential to create interesting contrasts between surfaces
of the same material. This is an important consideration when creating
different areas of interest in products made out of a single material.
Colour and Form
Inherent aluminium colour processes, like anodizing, work directly with
the soft and reflective nature of the material, and if the process is also
right for the form, it will help enhance nuances and details that would not
be visible otherwise.
A4xoq1eeo |}dg
The polished detail on the edge of the table was
inspired by the edge of high-end leather bags
which is often left visible creating a nice trim
detail. Although it was possible to change the
colour too, it felt more appropriate to have a
polished trim as a contrasting surface detail.
Design by Alex Rasmussen, Neal Feay.
132
CASE STUDY
BbAPllyhae oixrt o
The half polished, half matte effect was
achieved by CNC milling the form, bead
blasting half of it and machine-finishing the
other half and lastly, grey anodizing. Produced
by Neal Feay.
PbABllhyaeo ixtr o
The volume on the left was CNC milled,
followed by one bead blast pass and grey ano-
dizing. The volume on the right was CNC milled,
followed by one pass of machine finish and teal
anodizing. Produced by Neal Feay.
133
CMF DESIGN
SURFACE DESIGN
BASED ON PRODUCT
STRATEGY
In some cases, product innovation lies
within the design strategy of the material
itself, thus influencing branding,
production methods and ultimately cost.

CMF DESIGN
MERGING SURFACE DESIGN AND
PRODUCT STRATEGY WITH ROHI
Based in Bavaria, Germany, rohi is a family-owned company that
specializes in locally developing, designing and producing premium
quality wool fabrics. Their client list includes major airlines such as
Emirates, Lufthansa and Singapore Airlines, and furniture manufac-
turers such as Knoll International and Vitra.
The company uses exclusively premium wool to weave seat cover
fabrics as some of wool’s natural properties include stain resistance,
water repellence and fire retardancy. Because of these inherent char-
acteristics of the material, there are no additional finishing processes
applied to the final product other than carefully washing and drying,
as well as singing its surface in order to make it as smooth as possible.
A Personalized Experience
The company’s creative design team questioned why an aircraft cabin
should have the same pattern on every seat, instead of offering a more
personalized experience to individual passengers. They also questioned
how they could create an individualized seating experience while still
offering the benefit of a visually cohesive and harmonized cabin.
They setup to fully understand the design implications and technical
considerations of designing a collection based on this premise. This
process required an extensive level of competence and knowledge on
aspects such as the different elements and structures to be combined
into one layout and the selection of the right textures and colours to be
used correctly in order to create and convey the idea of a cohesive yet
eclectic cabin design.
Despite facing important challenges, such as higher time input into
the design process and a higher level of complexity during the testing of
the different visual and structural textures into a full repeat, the creative
team came up with a truly innovative textile concept and a new approach
to designing textiles for aircraft cabin interiors.
“The innovation delivered by rohi is an extra-long design repeat,
which is composed of varying patterns, textures and styles that are
strung together endlessly and transition-free. Each seat dress cover is
cut from the same repeat pattern and features just one part number,
reducing wastage and complexity.”
rohi
156
CASE STUDY
Repeat
The repeat provides a design which is up to 6 meter long and is com-
posed of several different patterns, textures and styles that are strung
together endlessly and transition-free. Once the textile is woven, pieces
are then cut out of the roll and sewn into dress covers, showing random
sections of the repeat. Since each of the seat covers features an individual
segment of the fabric design, they can then be distributed throughout
the cabin in any order and, although every seat has been given its “own”
identity, the overall cabin appearance remains harmonized.
“The use of a random cut-outs also allows maximum application of
the fabric ensuring low wastage, reducing its environmental impact.
Additionally, the random dressing of the seats with covers featuring
only one part number ensures easier logistics for airlines, which also
benefit from lower costs.”
rohi
This design approach is interesting as it touches upon an important
design strategy for CMF design, which is the process of thinking in terms
of systems and product collections, rather than individual products. Prod-
uct collections support the creation of series of different products that
together, belong to the same family. Product collections can be unified
by the design strategy or by the consistent use of colour, material and
texture, providing the benefit of product variation and personalization
while maintaining a cohesive design language and brand identity.
Poacfhco oautr-ot3 eds.yc om
rohi next generation UNIQUE. rohi next generation LUX. rohi next generation LITTLE.
137

Finish Design
CMF DESIGN
SENSORIAL FINISHES
There is a great variety of material
finishing process. All of them, beyond
their technical properties, have a
sensorial aspect that helps elevate
the intrinsic value of a product.

CMF DESIGN
ELEVATING VALUE
The sensorial aspect of finish design is closely, though not exclusively,
connected with time-intense manufacturing processes, high levels of
intricacy, complexity and unique know-how. Extreme detailing makes
products also more expensive as they take longer to be crafted and
are more difficult to replicate.
Hand-made
Handcrafted objects are unique from the moment of creation, as they
can't be exactly replicated. The skills to create hand-made products are
rare and difficult to acquire nowadays. In fact, the increasing amount of
mass produced consumer goods is causing many traditional manufac-
turing skills to disappear as the few people who had them, move out to
major cities in search for better jobs. It is difficult for younger generations
to take on the task to learn and preserve traditional handcraft skills with-
out proper support from the government or the private industrial sector.
Because of this, the value of hand-made products has skyrocketed within
recent years, especially if it involves legendary materials or traditional
making processes.
There has been an emergence of creative incubators, brand-special-
ized workshops, accelerators and company-run education centres pro-
moting new education models that prioritize the preservation of skills and
the fast tracking of funding for real impact ideas and enterprises. There
has been a surge in the use of natural materials, such as wood, ceramics,
glass and silk, in industrially manufactured consumer products, as an
approach to bring back natural imperfection to otherwise overly smooth
and perfect glossy products.
Wearing in
Natural materials like wood, certain metals and leather, are expected
to wear out through time and usage. This property is of high value in
the Western culture. Many products created with these materials — like
watches, fine jewellery and classic furniture pieces — are designed to
become iconic pieces and last a long time as they are handed down from
one generation to the next. The materials are expected to develop some
kind of “patina” and become softer to the touch as they wear in.
142
CASE STUDY
Kristalia’s hide chair 1085 edition is made from
timeless materials including a natural leather
hide, which is expected to work as an evolving
canvas. It will move, change colour and develop
ageing patinas, thus becoming increasingly
more beautiful and more unique through time.
143
CMF DESIGN
FUNCTIONAL FINISHES
Decoration technologies allow for the
creation of a great variety of surface
finishes, while providing materials.and
products with new functional qualities.

CMF DESIGN
NANCY HOLMAN
Nancy Holman is a Colour and Materials -CMF designer, most recently
with vehicle design company Faraday Future. For over five years she
worked at Tesla Motors as Design Manager for CMF, and was part
of the core design team that helped build the multi-award winning
Model S. Holman believes that her time at Volskwagen/Audi trained
her well, sharpened her design skills, and gave her an understanding
of what it would take to build a CMF department and lead a team at
Tesla. Shortly after leaving Tesla, she was tapped by FF to help build
their CMF department and launch their first vehicle. While part-time
at FF, in a consulting capacity, she is stepping outside automotive
industry to pursue building an on-line platform.
What are the three most common materials specific to CMF design
for automotive interiors?
Leather where the finish is dependent on the materials final use. Plastic
where the gloss level and grain varies depending on the zone it is used.
PUR/PVC, which are low gloss and grained according to both the zone
used and the appearance target.
What are the main finishing processes for each of these materials?
The finishing process for leather consists of a basecoat, which acts like
an adhesion layer, much like in a paint process. It is then given a colour
coat, which is typically sprayed on with automated spray guns. The final
finish, the topcoat, is what provides the leather with the haptic (the touch
of it) along with the grain and the gloss level, which can be low or high,
depending on the initial target, as well as aid in colour fastness (how
quickly the colour will fade or not fade). The topcoat helps determine
whether the haptic is either dry or wet. Some OEMs (Original Equipment
Manufacturers) prefer a dryer hand when touching the leather. They
believe this is a more sporty approach and aids in keeping the driver from
slipping back and forth in their seat. Other OEMs prefer a wet hand,
which feels either wet or slippery when touching the leather.
146
Q&A
They perceive this as a softer haptic and therefore more luxurious.
Plastic can take many forms: from soft to hard, sheets, textiles, skins
or laminates, etc. For hard plastic, such as a PC-ABS or ABS, a grain
typically helps to reduce light reflections on its surface, as well as provide
abrasion resistance and better wear and tear. The sunlight reflecting on
the top of a dashboard or shoulder of the door helps to break up the light
bouncing off of the surface and reduces the reflection on the windscreen,
thus providing better visibility.
The finishing process for PUR/PVC is not unlike leather. It is a very
similar process, but the start is entirely different. Whereas leather is a
natural material, a PUR or PVC textile starts its life out in a powder form
and chemicals are added to create it in a roll form. To achieve the colour
on the material, it is finished with a basecoat and lacquer is then applied,
followed by a proprietary topcoat. Like leather, the topcoat helps provide
the hand or haptic of the material, along with the selected grain.
Why is this process necessary for the particular material, part or
function it is applied to from a CMF design perspective?
From a CMF perspective, the way a leather hide is finished is first based
on the end objective. If it is the desire to present as natural a material as
possible, with little to no processing, then an aniline leather is suitable.
The natural markings and follicles of the hide are far more visible, there is
no surface treatment to the hide, the hide is not UV stable and is suscep-
tible to oil and fingerprint markings as well as a host of other ingredients
that can readily stain and mark the hide. If however, the main objective
is to significantly reduce costs, while still maintaining a leather surface,
wrapped or trimmed, then a corrected grain leather, where the natural
grain has been removed, is heavily coated with pigments and polymers
after which a uniform grain pattern is embossed onto the hide.
Grains are a great way to finish a plastic, they provide function, visual
interest through contrast between a smooth and textured surface, as well
as contrast in gloss level. Gloss, like grain, can be functional, aesthetic or
both. For example, a designer may want to draw attention to a particular
detail or emphasize a form. This can be accomplished with gloss alone
and/or texture, by highlighting one area with high gloss and the surround-
ing areas or details in low gloss.
The way a PUR or PVC material is finished can sometimes depend on
which area of the vehicle the material will be applied to. From a CMF
perspective, the finish offers the opportunity to either create a sophisti-
cated and luxurious feeling on a door armrest, or help to cover scratches
and markings by choosing a more aggressive grain for a high wear-and-
tear zone.
147
CMF DESIGN
Can you name products in the market that have this particular
finish process?
You need not look any further than the fashion industry to see the many
accessories and clothing items that utilize leather. The suppleness seen
and felt in leather used for fashion stands in stark contrast to what is
often experienced in a vehicle. This is due to the fact that the automotive
industry has far greater testing and quality management processes that
a material must adhere to. Coatings in fashion can be far less heavily
applied, but they still run through a similar finishing process.
The consumer electronics industry has a wide array of plastic on
display, from cell phones to dishwashers and TVs. Pretty much every
consumer good has plastic in it. Many phones have a subtle grain applied
that is hardly visible to the eye, but can certainly be felt. It is there to
improve your grip.
Several high-end luxury handbags mainly consist of PVC with
trimmed accents, such as a leather handle. It is also a useful and popular
material in home upholstery, as it is seen as a lower costs alternative to
leather, has great wear and is easy to clean.
Every material has its own set of applicable finishing processes and
technologies. The more we know about how a material behaves, the more
we can leverage its functional properties to create intriguing, innovative
and functional finishing effects.
BAe"eJpysauOyouoaB*ls endjesj pzwiuio!ylny ig og o
The construction of the wall tile includes
three layers: the top “combination marble”
and the middle “line gradation” have a partial
matte finish and the bottom layer is done
through impression vacuum metalized process.
148
Q&A
PCoNbapPcrofinhryoi .sdoo un s dtrthuotiacn e gts y
Wall tile combines In Mould Decoration (IMD)
processes with panel and touch sensor technol-
ogy. The touch sensor sets on the backside of
the panel and the IMD uses special non-conduc-
tive ink - radio waves free - for the touch sensor.
On the main surface, the printed texture and
pattern resemble that of a marble tile and once
it is touch, a hidden image emerges to indicate
different functionalities.
149
CMF DESIGN
150
METALS
MOST COMMON TYPES
Our civilization was built based on seven metals known as “metals of
antiquity”: gold, copper, silver, lead, tin, iron and mercury. Currently there
are 86 known metals but before the 19th century only 24 of them had
been discovered.
Metals are very valuable because of their versatility, so much that
products in the market with visible parts made out of metal are consid-
ered more valuable and prestigious. As metals provide excellent rigidity
and durability properties, they have the highest likelihood of all materials
to hold their intrinsic value over time, even after surfaces have worn out
due to prolonged use.
In recent years, there has been an enormous amount of technologies
developed with the scope of “simulating” metal or creating a “metallic
feel” in order to provide added value to products and to scale up the
price tag. Some of these technologies are plating, vacuum metalizing
with metal foils and films, as well as a large number of surface finishing
coatings and paint effects.
Silver
In the past, as payment for English cattle, East Germans compensated
the British with silver coins dubbed “Easterlings.” The Easterling became
Printed metal surfaces emulate woven and other
delicate patterns. Patterns can be printed over
metal surfaces with different finishes — brushed,
satin finished and polished — in order to create
intriguing surfaces.
151
CMF DESIGN
widely accepted as a standard of English currency and its name was
abbreviated to “Sterling,” which is now used to refer to the highest
grade of silver metal, indicating that it contains at least 92.5% of pure
silver. Sterling silver is the whitest of all of the precious metals and has
been heralded for centuries for its highly lustrous finish and versatile
applications.
Silver is embraced by the medical community and by the contract
industry for its antimicrobial properties. Although titanium is well known
for its strength and inert qualities, other metals like copper and aluminium
are also beginning to gain recognition for their antimicrobial and biocom-
patibility traits.
Silver, as most metals, has very good electrical conductivity proper-
ties, which make it ideal for applications such as printed circuit boards in
mobile phones, computers and TV screens. Silver-based inks can produce
RFID tags (radio frequency identification) used in millions of products to
track inventory and prevent theft. In the automotive industry, basic func-
tions like opening the power windows or adjusting the seats are activated
through a silver, weave-conductive membrane switch.
Stainless Steel
Stainless steel is a steel alloy with a percentage of chromium content.
It is used in cases where the strength and anti-corrosion properties of
steel are required at the same time. Within the medical field for instance,
stainless steel is used in surgical tools because of its high resistance to
wear, corrosion and because of its anti-bacterial properties.
Stainless steel is a very strong material that although it is hard to
form, retains its shape for a long time. In consumer electronics, stainless
steel is used both for strength and for cosmetic reasons. Some of the
main frames of premium mobile devices where circuit boards and display
components are eventually mounted, are made out of forged stainless
steel; but since the consumer usually only sees the external parts, addi-
tional finishes are needed, including brushing or sandblasting depending
of the desired effect.
Aluminium
Raw aluminium is the third most abundant element on earth. Since it is
a soft metal, like platinum and gold, it tends to dent and scratch easily,
requiring special finishing processes and careful handling. Aluminium
is the one of the most used metals in aviation because of its strength,
lightweight, formability and versatility of finishing treatments such as
anodizing and plating. Currently, the automotive and aviation industries
are innovating through the creation of aluminium chassis reinforced with
carbon fibre.
152
METALS
Alloys
Metal alloys — which are normally composed by two or more types of
metals — are excellent when it comes to achieving specific material
properties, such as improving strength while still being lighter in weight
than metal itself. Some examples of metal alloys include bronze, pewter
and brass.
In some contemporary products, specially in fine gold jewellery, alloys
with 18-karat gold are engineered to be at least two times stronger than
gold itself and to create special colour hues like rose gold for instance.
Currently, some high-end consumer electronics and wearables are cre-
ating their own range of metal alloys with specific material compositions
and unique shades of colours.
PPbBrahyiso atcnoh ke
The BlackBerry Passport smartphone has a
stainless steel structure, which also works as a
frame band and as part of the main antenna. The
frame wraps around the entire outer edge of the
phone in a solid piece of steel, providing a solid
feeling to the handset.
153
CMF DESIGN
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
There are different finishing processes which are commonly applied
to metals for a variety of purposes, including the creation of surface
decoration, minimizing reflectivity, improving hardness and resistance to
wear, preventing corrosion, adding a colour effect and in general, all the
treatments that focus on extending the useful life of metals. Below are the
most commonly used finishing processes, as they relate to CMF design.
FORGING
Forging is a metalworking manufacturing process where a metal piece is
compressed between two forms into a specific shape and in a-controlled,
uniform way to produce a very strong part. Forging can make a metal
piece stronger than an equivalent cast or machined part because, as the
metal is shaped during the forging process, its internal grain becomes
continuous throughout, making the metal piece much stronger.
Benefits
1. Currently the industry of digital watches, is utilizing cold forging
processes for stainless steel alloys, in order to increase the hardness
of the material from 40 to 80 per cent and to make it more resistant to
scratches.
2. Cold forging is an ideal process for soft metals like aluminium,
since the material is deformed under its crystallization point. Since
this process requires very little finishing work, it also helps reduce
production costs.
Challenges
1. When hot forging is used, there are risks of achieving less precise
tolerances and a varying metal grain structure. Also, there is a possi-
bility of warping of the material during the cooling process.
2. After forging parts, which are both structural and cosmetic — like
a mobile device chassis that is also the frame trim — the visible parts
need to be polished or brushed by hand afterwards in order to create
a pleasant surface finish.
154
METALS
CNC MACHINING
An automated program called computer numeric control machining
(CNC) is utilized to achieve very high level of precision in metal surface
decoration.
Benefits
1. Since CNC machining is a very accurate process, it helps decrease
the amount of material waste thanks to the optimal use of the raw
material.
2. It is an ideal process for fine details like grips, screw holes and
other assembly features that require a very high level of precision.
3. Since the process delivers high consistency from part to part, it is
ideal for high production, high efficiency manufacturing and finishing
runs.
4. CNC machining is also used in low production parts as a cost effi-
cient process that does not require the creation of moulds or tooling.
Challenges
1. Depending on the tool that is utilized to cut the metal part, the pro-
cess can leave marks on the surface of the metal, which are normally
smoothened out afterwards, in order to minimize reflectivity and in
order to create the desired surface effect.
2. When a part is machined for a smooth polished surface quality, it
requires higher tolerance and more time to machine — versus machining
an intentional texture designed to utilize the milling marks as part of the
final design.
PbABllhyaeo ixtr o
Milling of the Suzuri Series of table and bench
seats. Design by Alex Rasmussen, Neal Feay.
155
CMF DESIGN
Surface with machining traces.
By Neal Feay.
Adxog}ea 0gyU d
CASTING
Casting is a process that consists on converting molten metal into a
pre-existing shape or form by pouring it into al mould. The most used
metals for casting include steel and a variety of aluminium, copper, iron
and platinum alloys. There are different casting processes for metals
including die casting, which forces molten metal into a mould normally
made out of steel or zinc and sand casting, which uses sand as the mould
material so in some instances, patterns are carved directly into the sand.
Benefits
1. Metal castings tend to form more precisely than ordinary forged
and welded parts.
2. Die casting is an ideal process for high production runs and
although it requires the creation of moulds that can be costly to
produce, it yields lower production costs.
3. Die casting produces parts with very good surface finish and with
good dimensional consistency throughout the production run.
156
METALS
Challenges
1. Although sand casting is a less costly process than die casting, it
can yield parts with low fidelity to the original design.
2. In terms of surface finish, there are properties that are difficult to
control such as porosity, in which case additional grinding or polishing
is recommended after casting.
5. When it comes to smaller or more detailed pieces, casting may not
be the most ideal process as sometimes, it is challenging to create a
mould that allows for proper and exact tolerances.
EXTRUDING
Extrusion is a process, not limited to metals, in which a material is pushed
or pulled through a customized die or mould. Some of the metals com-
monly extruded include aluminium, which is the most common, as well as
brass, copper, led, tin, magnesium, steel, zinc and titanium. Besides the
shape, temper and type of alloy needed, the biggest contributing factor
to colour and finish during the metal extrusion process is the temperature
as it provides specific hardness and finish characteristics to the material.
Benefits
1. The parts formed through extrusion processes present excellent
surface finish and increased material strength.
2. This process allows for the creation of parts with very complex
cross sections — with hollow cavities — enabling the use of materials
that normally are very brittle.
Challenges
1. When extruding aluminium, lower extrusion temperatures can
produce shapes with better quality surfaces, however, since higher
pressure is needed for the process, this can be a challenge for extrud-
ing certain shapes.
2. When excessive temperatures and speeds are applied through the
extrusion process, tearing of the metal can occur especially at thin
edges or sharp corners, creating weaves and twists in the final shape.
CHEMICAL ETCHING
This corrosion process is used to produce complex surface decoration on
metal parts with high level of detail. Chemical etching is used to manu-
facture intricate and highly precise metal parts with tight tolerances for
different industries including aerospace and medical. The decoration in
chemical etching is done by applying a layer of a selective coating, which
works as a mask, and submerging the part in baths of temperature-regu-
157
CMF DESIGN
Eco-Etch patterns for architectural applications
on stainless steel by Forms+Surfaces®. Etched
patterns are applied to stainless steel using an
eco-friendly photolithographic bead-blasting
process instead of acids or other toxic chemi-
cals. Top: Tidal™ pattern with Seastone™ finish.
Bottom: Flicker™ pattern with satin finish.
158
METALS
lated etching chemicals. The chemicals then react with the material dis-
solving it in the non-masked areas and thus creating a surface or texture
effect. There is also an etching process based on photochemical etching,
which is utilized to produce high precision, flat metal parts by exposing
the previously laminated part section with a photo resistant coating or
mask to ultra-violet rays.
Benefits
1. In this finishing process, no heat is involved — contrary to laser
marking — so there are no risks associated with excessive heat appli-
cation.
2. Extremely thin metal can be treated through photochemical etching
without creating any distortion of the part. Neither properties such as
hardness, strength or formability are affected during the process.
Challenges
1. It is a slow and a multi-step process, including the application of
a mask over the parts to be treated which can elevate the costs of
manufacturing.
POLISHING /B RUSHING
The process is chosen depending on the desired functional and aesthetic
requirements of the external metal part. Polishing is used for mirror-like
surfaces, sand-blasting for satin to matte surfaces and brushing for
unidirectional satin surfaces. All those processes are performed before
assembly. In premium or high-end products, the polishing procedure is
often performed by hand.
Brushed aluminium is a very common trim used in several industries
including automotive, consumer electronics and large-scale home appli-
ances, providing visually appealing surface with a long lasting finish.
Both, polished or sand blasted aluminium trims have become a symbol of
high-end consumer products.
Benefits
1. Brushed surfaces can hide more defects and irregularities than
polished surfaces. They can also withstand more wear and tear marks
caused by use.
2. Brushing as well as beat blasting, are processes used to create the
so-called “satin finish”, a distinctive trim for metal surfaces that is not
matte, nor glossy. When a satin finish is layered with colour tints, it
creates beautiful colours with intriguing highlights and reflections.
159
CM F DESIGN
Challenges
1. Brushed surfaces for automotive trim applications must be smooth
to the touch.
2. In the automotive industry, tests must be performed to ensure
the treated metal surface is not going to be affected by reactions to
external chemicals, such as sunscreen lotion or oil from fingerprints.
3. High gloss polished metal is the most critical finish for automotive
interiors applications in general because, if the surface is too reflec-
tive, it can create dangerous glare to the driver.
4. High quality surface polishing is often performed by hand, which is
very time consuming and results in higher production costs.
EMBOSSING
Embossing is a process that combines heat and pressure, in order to
create a tri-dimensional pattern, which is pressed on sheet metal, by
passing the part through male and female roller dies. Aesthetic applica-
tions include home appliances, architectural panels as well as, automotive
and consumer electronics trims. The process can be applied to different
metals including aluminium alloys, brass, steel and zinc.
Benefits
1. The process of embossing allows for maintaining the same metal
thickness before and after the part is treated.
2. It can be used from medium to high production runs and also for
unlimited amounts.
3. It allows for the creation of unlimited pattern possibilities, which
can be printed with no variation from part to part.
4. Functionally, it can help reduce friction and static of the part as well
as increase its stiffness and rigidity. | can also help improve surface
grip, weather the part is handheld or used for high-traffic applica-
tions.
Challenges
1. Embossed surfaces can accumulate dirt or oil through time and use,
within the creases that the pattern forms.
2. Metal trims for automotive are usually no more than 2 mm thick, so
patterns with extreme radios can break the part.
3. Embossed patterns can be more expensive to produce because a
pattern cylinder needs to be custom-created for each design. This
cost should be factored into the cost of the final part.
160
METALS
The aluminium trays are hand-dipped in
water-based dye, a process that resembles that
of painting Easter eggs. Trays by Neal Feay and
Opening Ceremony.
PbABllhyaeo ixtr o
ANODISING
Anodising is a process used to make metal less affected by environmental
factors, such as air and water, by increasing the thickness of the natural
oxide layer on surfaces and parts. Aluminium alloys are anodised to
increase corrosion resistance, allow for colouring, improve lubrication
or adhesion, and to create a non-conductive layer. The most common
anodising process, with sulphuric acid on aluminium, produces a porous
surface which can accept dyes easily.
161
CM F DESIGN
Benefits ‘
4. Anodised aluminium can be up to 50% more durable than alumin-
jum on its own. This is thanks to an anodising process that uses an
electric charge and a diluted acid bath (15% per cent of sulphuric acid
solution activates the anodizing process) to create a layer of oxide on
the surface of the metal.
Challenges
1. Although the number of dye colours is almost endless, they tend to
vary according to the type of base alloy utilized, making them difficult
to replicate.
2. Anodising is the most expensive of all of the processes used to
colour aluminium. Only pure aluminium can be anodised so the purity
of the material is very important. Cast aluminium for instance, con-
tains additional elements like silicone, copper and zinc, which are not
evenly spread and do not etch properly. When anodised, these ele-
ments turn grey or black, producing surfaces that can be too porous
to obtain the desired colour. Therefore anodising is most effective
when applied to pure aluminium, preferably extruded or machined.
LASER CUTTING /M ARKING
Laser cutting is a process utilized to cut different materials — including
metal — for industrial manufacturing applications through the use of a
high-power laser operated through optics. This process burns the mate-
rial, leaving an edge with very high quality surface finish. Laser marking
and laser engraving are processes more common to the jewellery and
small accessories industry. While laser marking is an annealing process,
involving heat treatment to change a metal surface’s colour or to create a
surface decoration effect, laser engraving consists of removing material
from the surface.
Benefits
1. In consumer electronics, smaller and fine details like grips, screw
wholes and other precise assembly features are performed by laser
cutting in order to obtain a level of maximum precision.
2. Laser marking is a chemical and residue-free process, which can
last longer than traditional engraving decoration.
Challenges
1. In some cases, a high amount of concentrated energy applied to a
very thin part can break it or distort its form. Also, if the laser heat is
not properly calibrated, burning marks can occur.
2. In general, laser markings or engravings on soft metals are likely to
162
METALS
scratch and wear faster than if applied on harder metals. The use of
harder metals is recommended, as they are more likely to provide the
surface decoration with a longer lifespan.
PVD COATING
PVD stands for Physical Vapour Deposition. It is a method where coated
ions are bombarded onto the surface of a material in order to create a
metallic, decorative look in a wide range of colours. PVD coatings are
established surface finishing processes for the watch industry and in
general products where long time quality is expected.
Some of the most common metals used in this process include, zirco-
nium, titanium-aluminium alloys, chromium and niobium as well as brass
and zinc. Depending on the industry and on further processing methods,
different formulations of the PVD coatings can be created in order to
elevate certain material and surface properties.
Benefits
1. Compared to traditional electroplated coatings, PVD coatings can:
provide higher hardness, resistance to wear and friction.
2. The process allows for a great variety of colours, which do not
change or tarnish over time or under UV radiation.
3. Since the process is controlled by and stored in computer-controlled
systems, the quality of the colours and coatings can be easily replicated.
4. Currently, there are new developments of hybrid PVD coating
technologies and Nano-composite coatings based on a dielectric
matrix with embedded metallic Nano clusters, which besides offering
increased durability, will aid in the creation of new colours, like green
and red, which were previously considered challenging to achieve.
Challenges
1. This process is limited to conductive materials or surfaces that can
be oxidized.
2. Surfaces that have been PVD coated tend to reveal fingerprints and
scratches easily.
3. If a PVD coating is used to create graphics, it tends to be more
durable when applied to harder materials.
4. Because PVD coatings are very thin — 0.3 microns — when used for
decorative surface finishing processes, they do not offer substantial
corrosion protection to the part therefore, they need to be applied
over a corrosion resistant nickel or chromium coating. In some cases, a
ceramic coating is deposited during the process to increase hardness.
163
CMF DESIGN
PLATING
Commonly known as electroplating, the process uses an electric current
to ad a metallic layer onto a surface in order to impart it with physical
properties such as corrosion resistance, durability, hardness and ease
of cleaning. The process puts a negative charge onto the metal part
before dipping it into a solution with positively charged metal ions.
Due to the positive and negative charges, the two metals attract each
other forming a uniform layer. There are different types of electroplating
processes including copper plating, silver plating and chromium plating.
The traditional plating process involves initial steps, such as polishing
Plated finishes samples by HighTech finishing.
164
METALS
the raw material to a mirror smooth finish, applying a base of copper
to seal the surface and applying a layer of nickel to provide a durable
foundation. Only after these steps are conducted, the selected plated
effect can finally be applied in a polished, satin or matte finish. The
entire plating process may take up to 50 steps and certain variations can
occur due to poor base material quality, type of finish selected and other
processing variables. Some of the most commonly used materials that get
electroplated include aluminium in the aviation industry for its strength,
lightweight and formability properties, as well as steel, zinc and plastics,
which are widely used across industries including automotive, cosmetic
package, fashion accessories, toys and a broad range od consumer
electronics.
Benefits
1. This technology is very useful when it comes to providing ordinary
surfaces with an elegant metal look and feel at a low cost.
2. Besides providing a wide variety of colours and textures to choose
from, plating is also used to improve resistance to corrosion and wear,
as well as to impart electrical conductivity to the materials or parts it
is applied to.
3. It is a repeatable process, so damaged parts can be reworked to
match the original existing part. This is an especially good advantage
when designing large aviation interiors.
Challenges
1. Although plastics have become more popular as a base material for
plating, they are often problematic due to limitations in the process
and due to poor surface quality.
2. If Nickel is used in the process, additional testing for nickel release
of the plated part should be conducted, in fact, for parts meant to
be in direct contact with the skin, nickel-free plating processes are
recommended.
3. For the aviation industry, most plating finishes are created to meet
strict ISO controlled processing standards and each part needs to
pass through various levels of inspection with a near zero defect ratio.
4. Satin finishes require extra steps to produce the satin lines or
“grain” on the finish. Parts must be plated to a polished finish first and
then a rough pad is used to manually go back and forth along the part
to apply pressure to the finish, producing the satin texture. A great
deal of hand skill is required to keep satin lines straight. It may take
several passes with alternating pads of various levels of roughness in
order to achieve the desired surface texture effect.
165
CMF DESIGN
Systems.
Sensitile
Photo
YamagDuiccehb iy
166
PLASTICS
MOST COMMON TYPES
Plastics are both synthetic and semi-synthetic materials that can be
moulded into different shapes and products. Most plastics are pet-
ro-chemical based and some of them are partially natural.
The first completely synthetic plastic was Bakelite and was invented
in 1907. In 1933, polyethylene was discovered. The First World War’s
improvements in chemical technology led to an explosion in new forms of
plastic and mass production began between the 1940s and 1950s.
In today’s industrial landscape, plastics are considered the quintes-
sential material of mass production, not just because of their versatility
as they offer endless creative design possibilities all throughout their
production process, but also and especially because of their ease of
manufacturing, their accessibility, abundance and affordability.
During the peak oil era, plastics have acquired a slightly negative
connotation for being synthetic materials derived from petrochemicals.
Although they have been increasingly associated with environmental
pollution and waste creation; different biodegradable formulations of
more sustainable plastic composites are now being developed, including
bio-composites and a range of natural plastics called bio-plastics.
For CMF design purposes, plastics facilitate the offering of multiple
colours and surface effects without necessarily incurring into new mould-
ing or tooling costs. They can be coloured and textured directly in the
mould. Moreover, different material effects can be added to the pigment
mixture itself during its fabrication in order to achieve different looks.
Metalized or pearlescent particles, reinforcing fillers and minerals or
metal capable of improving plastic’s performance are just a few.
After plastics are formed they allow for a broad range of post-mould-
ing finishes such as electroplating, painting, coating, laser-marking,
digital and silk printing. They are also ideal when it comes to the creation
of complex forms and challenging constructions achieved through mixed
processes including co-moulding with rubber or silicone, rotor moulding
and injection moulding.
In terms of challenges, recycling can be difficult for certain types of
plastics, such as PVC (Polyviny! Chloride) and viny!. PVC releases dioxins
during and after its production, which may pollute the air as it produces
VOC's (volatile organic compounds) which, can cause respiratory issues
and headaches. The disposal process of vinyl is also challenging as it
does not biodegrade; it can only become smaller and smaller through
physical disintegration, so its particles can be harmful to the bodies of
birds and fish.
167
CMF DESIGN
Thermoplastics
This category of plastics requires heat to be formed. Some examples of
thermoplastics are polycarbonate (PC), polyethylene (PE), polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyes-
ter (PES), polystyrene (PS), polyamides (PA) and acrylonitrile butadiene
styrene (ABS).
Thermoplastics are mostly used in industrial applications and con-
sumer products as they often provide multiple possibilities for CMF
design. Some of the most common applications of thermoplastics are
textiles and fibres (PES), soft drinks bottles (PET), electronic equipment
cases or external package for electronics (ABS), eye glasses, lenses and
baby bottles (PC), bottle caps, appliances, car bumpers (PP), synthetic
leather and synthetic laminates (PVC) and car interior and exterior parts
and portable mobile devices (PC/ABS).
Bioplastics
Bioplastics result from the combination of both renewable biomass
(starches, cellulose, biopolymers, etc.) and fossil-based carbon. Some
of them are biodegradable and therefore, used for disposable items like
cutlery, vegetable containers and most recently, they are being used also
in non-disposable applications such as mobile device cases, carpets and
isolation for car interiors.
Plastic Composites
This category includes combinations between plastic and other materials
with different physical and chemical properties, such as wood, carbon
fibre, Kevlar and glass fibre, in order to produce a final “reinforced
composite” with improved characteristics, which vary depending on the
application. Some of the most common include, fibre reinforced polymers
(FRP), carbon fibre reinforced polymer (CFRP) and glass reinforced plastic
(GRP) among others.
Elastomers
These are a type of copolymers or a mix of polymers, combining both
thermoplastic and elastomeric characteristics, like plastic and rubber, for
instance. Thermo plastic elastomers (TPE) include thermo plastic polyure-
thanes (TPU) as well as other thermoplastic copolyesters and polyamides.
TPEs provide products with very good tactile characteristics such as
smoothness and warmness to the touch.
168
PLASTICS
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
INJECTION
The process of plastic injection moulding is very common and widely
used in the world. It consists of creating plastic parts by injecting the
heated liquid material into a previously created mould.
Benefits
1. This process is consistent, quick and accurate. Since moulds can be
custom-made and also accurately repaired if they get damaged, there
is a low degree of error during the manufacturing process.
2. Once the tool is created, it is possible to use different materials,
colours and visual effects within the mix, in order to obtain endless
possibilities.
3. If recyclable plastics are used, it is possible to grind up the waste
that is produced during the process and utilize it again, so the process
is very effective in terms of efficient material usage.
Challenges
1. The initial tooling costs for customized designs can be high,
depending on the complexity of the part, so before setting ona
specific pattern or design, it is important to ensure it will have maxi-
mum manufacturing potential and design possibilities.
Hexagonal plastic plates GE.
169
CMF DESIGN
2. There are some limitations in terms of wall thickness, especially if
the design is expected to be formed into a single part with varying
thicknesses.
TEXTURE
Textured plastic can provide and elevate decorative, technical and
functional characteristics of a product. There are international industry
standards for moulded textures in plastics, used to clearly specify differ-
ent levels of surface graining. There are also several methods to create
textured plastic including, injection, thermoforming, compression and
blow moulding.
Plastic textures for CMF design provide endless opportunities in
terms of colour, gloss level and grain. Moulds can be custom made in
order to create anything from completely polished surfaces, to leather
imitation textures that create an aesthetically pleasing feel, or very coarse
and rugged grains targeting high-performance applications.
In automotive interiors, the selection of textures varies depending on the
zone where the material is utilized and on the targeted market tier. By
utilizing a grained texture, the character and story of the design can be
transferred to the product. Off-road cars for instance, will have a more
robust-looking plastic texture grain, which relates to the story of rugged-
ness, outdoor and adventure.
Benefits
1. A textured surface can help hide the ow marks or what is com-
monly called “tiger skin” which results from adding decorative par-
ticles into the mix flow. Normally these marks appear near the flow
gates, following the movement of the mix.
2. A grained surface will make the part more scratch resistant than a
polished part. It will also provide it with better usability and ergonom-
ics in functional areas such as grips, buttons or handles.
3. A textured plastic surface can be very cost effective in comparison
to paint, as only one production step is needed in order to provide the
surface’s look and feel as well as a wide range of gloss/matte levels.
Challenges
1. When the moulded textures are too coarse, they can accumulate
dust and dirt in more obvious ways in which case, the use of more
neutral plastic colours is recommended.
2. In terms of manufacturing process, a textured mould can be more
useful and practical than a polished mould when releasing the part out.
3. When plastic is mixed with special effects, special attention needs
to be allocated to avoid flow marks during the moulding.
170
PLASTICS
OVERMOULDING
Plastic injection overmoulding, also known as co-moulding, is a process
utilized for combining multiple thermoplastic materials within a single
product part. The process consists on fusing the materials together by
using separate plastic injection moulds during the process.
The most common soft materials that are normally moulded are
thermoplastic elastomers (TPE) and urethanes. The hard materials range
from polycarbonate (PC) and some polyamides (Nylon) to some types of
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).
The most common applications of overmoulded plastics include
medical devices, grip handles, appliance knobs and many domestic
consumer products.
Benefits
1. Since the process combines different material properties within the
same process, it is very cost effective as there are no post-assembly
steps required, such as bonding, welding, painting and coating.
2. The combination of TPEs with more rigid materials provides prod-
ucts with a soft touch feel while enhancing its ergonomics, strength
and dimensional structure.
3. In this process, the colour, material and finish emerge instantly and
directly from the mould and, since the colour is embedded within
the material itself there are no concerns about its durability; it won’t
scratch or peal like paint or other post-process coatings.
Challenges
1. When plastic is used for co-moulded parts, in production, scrap
material generated by the process is commingled and fused together,
making it very difficult if not impossible to recycle.
2. In use, co-moulding plastic with other materials makes repairing a
single product part impossible, prompting the discarding of the entire
product.
3. In disposal, recycling is ruled out due to the contamination of the
material stream with different foreign materials.
IMD* - IN MOULD DECORATION
This process is used to bond a pre-printed surface or film, through
injection moulding onto other parts or components. IMD is an ideal tech-
nology to create small and medium-sized parts such as control panels for
consumer electronics, home appliances and direct product applications
in cosmetics, packaging and automotive interiors.
Parts created through IMD are sometimes called “soft plastics” because
they are made by texturing or printing a flexible and thin foil first and later
171
CMF DESIGN
back-forming it within a more rigid material. When the foil is textured,
a roller with an endless negative grain is used, which creates a positive
image of the pattern on the final surface.
Currently a number of NMT (nano moulding technology) processes
are also emerging to combine metals like aluminium, magnesium, stain-
less steel and titanium with hard resins through the moulding process.
*IMD is a registered trademark or a trademark of Nissha Printing Co.
Benefits
1. IMD is one of the most versatile and cost effective methods for
manufacturing and at the same time decorating durable plastic parts.
It is ideal for mass production runs, as it provides highly predictable
outputs with very good quality and quick turn around.
2. This process offers an endless variety of surface treatments and
looks 3. from solid colours and graphics to translucent window dis-
plays — all within one single technology. Some smartphone parts are
currently layering up to seven foils with different micro patterns in one
single surface, in order to create intriguing tri-dimensional effects.
3. Through the creation of IMD parts, it is possible to combine
functional elements such as logos, nameplates, written instructions
and illumination effects together with decorative graphic elements,
simplifying and shortening the production process.
4. The decorative effects obtained through IMD can closely emulate
other materials and processes such as electroplating, silkscreen
printing as well as paint and coating effects with equally good surface
quality.
5. When NCVM (non-conductive vacuum metal) film is used, it pro-
vides a metallic surface effect, which does not interfere with antenna
performance, a particularly important characteristic for digital smart
devices.
6. IMD supports the creation of highly complex product geometries.
Challenges
1. Some of the limitations of IMD technology are related to the
process of selection and matching of colours to other product parts,
especially those made from different materials. Some pigments
such as white for instance, are very translucent by nature, so certain
shades of white are inherently difficult to achieve. In some cases,
an additional layer with a metallic or mirror foil can be placed in
between the plastic and the final foil surface, in order to create some
opacity and to accentuate the desired colour effect. The colour of the
moulded plastic, which goes underneath the film, can also be used
to accentuate the end colour. In general, lighter shades of plastic will
yield brighter and more vivid colours, in the final surface.
172
PLASTICS
IMR - IN-MOULD ROLLER - IN MOULD RELEASE
In this process, the in-mould forming film is shaped and then moulded
onto a plastic material through injection-moulding or pressure-casting so
that the finished product is obtained after it is released from the mould
and the outer base layer is removed. Trimming process may be applied
to the shaped in-mould forming film before injection moulding or pres-
sure casting.
The main difference between IMD and IMR is that when IMR is used,
the final product does not have a protective film layer on the surface as
this is separated from the part after the pattern or design is transferred to
the moulding material in the injection process.
Benefits
1. This process is extremely cost-effective and since it has a high
degree of automation, it allows for an unlimited range of surface
patterns and colours.
Challenges
1. Since the final product surface is not a layer of transparent film
as the film is just a carrier agent during the production process, the
printed decoration can wear off or fade sooner than a part created
through IMD.
PoNPCcfrhioo i.osun strthotia en gs y
Texture gradiation. Partial Impression VM (vacuum Partial VM (vacuum metal-
matte printing effect achieved metalizing) effect achieved izing) effect over a surface
through IMD technology. The through IMD technology. with a printed wood texture.
matte ink sets between the This printing technique uses The entire effect is achieved
release layer and the hard a clear patterned ink layer. through IMD technology.
coat layer. After the IMD The vapour deposition layer
moulding process, the carrier coincides in the gravure print-
film comes off and the matte _ing process with the pattern
ink defuses the light reflection layer, so that an irregularity
as it contains some “rough- of reflection is seen on the
ness particles”. surface of the solid shape.
173
O = LL ra Lu icp) 2 Zz
TEXTiGeES
MOST COMMON TYPES
Textiles have existed since mankind’s instinct was to seek and to create
shelter and protection from the elements by weaving materials. Since
then, the use of textiles has been ubiquitous and connected with a sense
of comfort and wellbeing.
: Today, the level of technology involved in the creation of textiles is
quite amazing ranging from Nano materials to “programmable” textiles
that change colour and respond to digital and electronic commands,
revolutionizing the smart wearable device industry.
Textiles are also ideal for CMF design because of their unique ability to
combine functional and aesthetic properties. From the decorative point of
view, there is a broad range of post processes, when it comes to creating
multiple variations of the same product range and personalizing alterna-
tives, including printing, heat bonding, perforating, laser, stitching and
embroidering.
From the construction point of view, fibres with different properties
can be woven or layered to form structurally sound surfaces and support
very specific functional requirements. For instance, layered textiles can
confer sound absorbing properties to products or, when a material like
wool is utilized to construct the fabrics, it will provide it with low amma-
bility and high adaptability to changing climate conditions.
In CMF design, textiles are utilized by a number of different industries
ranging from interior design, automotive, aviation, medical, soft goods
(apparel and sports), and most recently the growing industry of wearable
electronics. For every industry, textiles must fulfil specific technical and
performance requirements. In aviation and automotive for instance,
they must meet international safety standards and regulations as well as
functional properties such as water repellence, flame retardancy, good
resistance to abrasion, light and colour fastness, excellent breathability
and good moisture transport.
In automotive interiors, textiles are mainly used for upholstery, door
panels and headliners and the main focus is on combining properties
such as acoustic isolation, sustainability, high performance, comfort and
ease of care. Some of the most common finishes applied to fabrics for
automotive interiors include, anti-static, anti-stain, weather-resistance,
water proof, and anti-bacterial. Depending on the type of performance
requirements for every vehicle category, the finishing processes applied
to textiles will vary.
There are many different types and ways to classify textiles for which
we would need to create an entire new book. In general, they can be
classified under the type of materials utilized: natural, synthetic or both,
under the type of fabrication process: woven, knitted, layered, bonded,
175
CMF DESIGN
tufted, non-woven, etc., or under the types of decoration treatments:
printing, lasering, embroidering, stitching and so on. For the purpose of
this book, we will list a few of the most commonly used types and treat-
ments, as they support CMF design, below.
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
KNITTING
Knitted textiles are created through a system of loops, which are formed
and interwoven by a single thread. They are ideal for sportswear and
apparel as they are flexible and can be constructed in small or large
pieces depending on the need.
There has been a surge of all-knitted sportswear where different
types of construction weaves are interlocked together to form the entire
upper of the shoe. These types of structures utilize-only one strand of
ultra-strong yarn to form the entire textile construction, making the final
product very lightweight and adaptable to the shape and movements of
the wearer’s foot. This type of constructions, especially in the footwear
industry, help eliminate unnecessary glues, adhesives and material combi-
nation mixtures that are difficult to recycle.
Benefits
1. By knitting, it is possible to build tubular or tri-dimensional con-
structions, which are ideal for apparel and sport applications that
need to form around the body’s contour.
2. Knits structures are based on interlocked loops, which provide
products with stretchable properties, ideal to tighten and snug
around irregular shapes.
3. Most types of knitted constructions, especially meshes, are often
wrinkle resistant due to the flexibility of the weave.
4. Knitted mesh textiles are also more breathable as the technical
construction of the weave forms a porous surface that is ideal for
products requiring the circulation of air or ventilation.
Challenges
1. Because of their less stable structural composition, knitted fabrics
tend to stretch and shrink constantly as a response to applied forces,
this may cause less structural stability - compared to woven textiles —
unless they are bonded to a more stable substrate.
176
TEXTICES
e
5 t
as e
=r
e
oP<eb e at
The upper part of the Nike Flyknit Racer is forme d bya
seamless knit upper. The technology was origina lly inspired
by runners who wanted the combination of the snug fit of a
sock combined with lightweight and versati lity.
TEC
CMF DESIGN
2. Knits are by nature porous constructions with irregular surfaces
which may present challenges when it comes to water and wind
protection.
Bonding textiles is a process where two or more layers of woven or
non-woven materials are formed together to behave as a single material.
The most traditional textile bonding process occurs between textiles and
foam which is common within automotive and aviation soft cover uphol-
stery, commercial and residential furniture, wall acoustic panels and in
sports applications such as show insoles, body supports and brace wear.
There are different kinds of processes utilized for bonding including ther-
mal and ultrasonic bonding. The ultra-sonic process uses high frequency
ultrasound weaves to molecularly bond multiple materials together —
most commonly thermoplastics. It can also produce a range of finishes
like laminating, embossing, perforating and cutting all of which make the
process ideal for manufacturing medical, surgical and sanitary products.
Benefits
1. This process is ideal for non-woven materials as it can bring dimen-
sional stability, surface decoration and a combination of functional
properties to them.
2. Ultrasonic bonding can be more cost effective than other bonding
processes since it does not utilize adhesive materials. At the same
Material bonding study for the Crease and Weld
bag series designed by Joris de Groot, using
PVC and machinery to produce rain gear. The
panels are "sewn" together using a micro-
wave-like, high frequency welding technique.
178
TEX TIEES
time, it allows for the creation of different surface decoration patterns
during the process.
3. Ultrasonic welding is a process ideal for cutting and at the same
time sealing edges of fabrics which normally tend to fray, such as
edge trimming of fleece material.
Challenges
1. When adhesive adherents are utilized, they must first be separated
before recycling the fabrics, which can be challenging. Because of
this, there is a new range of adhesives being developed called “dis-
mantlable adhesives” with recyclability in mind.
PRINTING
There are different processes for textile printing, including digital and
screen-printing. Digital printing can be applied to any kind of fabric and
is based on ink jet technologies, which allow for the creation of extremely
high definition, photo-realistic prints. The process is based on comput-
er-controlled high-speed valves, which inject the colours into the surface
with high precision and depth. This process can be applied to both
synthetic and natural materials including wool, polyamide, polyester
and acrylic.
Benefits
1. With digital printing it is possible to create and produce one-off
designs or change designs on the go, as the process is based on indi-
vidual valves rather than on lengthy repeats which require to change
inks and rollers.
2. Digital printing offers the possibility to print unlimited colours in
large formats — some machines measure up to 100 meters long.
Challenges
1. When screen printing is utilized, a repeat for mass production is
needed in order to maximize the size of the pattern.
2. When a repeat is used to print the fabric, it brings challenges to
the upholstery process in terms of accurately cutting and sewing the
textile to match the repeat, generating the use of extra material and
the creation of waste.
179
CMF DESIGN
180
LEATHER
MOST COMMON TYPES
Leather is a durable material that comes from the hides and skins of
animals including mammals, birds, reptiles and fish. After treatment,
leather provides a warm and sophisticated feel with a particular tactile
appearance accentuated by a natural scent.
The provenience of the leather hide, or more specifically where the
animal lived, is very important in order to assess the quality of the mate-
rial. Some manufacturers of high-end leather hides for aviation and auto-
motive interiors, utilize hides sourced from Germany, Italy and Northern
Europe, since these are considered, according to industry standards, to
be the finest hides in the world because the bulls there are rarely exposed
to barbed wire and insects so the skins don’t have scarring or bite marks.
When leather is used in its many different applications, it improves
the visual appearance of the product and its added real and perceived
value, not only for being a natural and authentic material but also because
as it ages, it develops a beautiful soft patina and a more personal connec-
tion with the user. There is always an extra premium to pay when choos-
ing leather as an upgraded option for consumer products.
Function wise though, it is not always the best choice for certain
applications. In upholstery for aviation for instance, there is a preference
for textile over leather, especially for longer flights, as textile tends to be
more breathable and comfortable. Nonetheless, leather is usually easier
to wipe clean than textile.
The question to choose textile or leather is also cultural. European
airlines are more inclined to use textiles in Premium classes for its func-
tionality, while Asian and Middle Eastern airlines still prefer to use the
natural, classic leather and to compensate for the lack of breathability,
they create design solutions where the passenger does not sleep on the
main leather surface of the seat but instead, on a textile surface that
emerges once the seat becomes fiat.
Natural leather
Natural leather is the resulting product of treating real animal hides with
a range of natural or artificial finishing processes. Depending on the
required application, these processes provide the leather with its final
appearance and specific level of quality through factors such as smooth
or coarse touch and evenness of surface irregularities as well as colour,
grain, texture and surface shine.
E- Leather
E-leather is made out of natural leather scraps, which are grind and
bonded to a textile backing and embossed with a grain texture. The main
181
CMF DESIGN
advantage of e-leather is its lightweight. It also has better quality and
consistency control for colour, texture and durability. Currently several
aviation interior applications are moving towards e-leather, since it has
the perceived value and good cleanability properties of real leather, yet it
is half its weight.
Synthetic Leather
Synthetic leather, commonly known as faux leather is a man-made leather
imitation. It has properties that regular leather does not have, like added
flexibility or four way stretch, which make it ideal for applications like
upholstered aircraft sidewall panels.
Napa and Suede
Suede leather is made from the splits of large animal hides and from the
underside of the skins of calf, lamb, goat and sometimes deer. Although
suede has a natural soft touch surface, which is thin and pliable, it tends
to be less durable than leather with full grain or a treated top surface.
Suede is ideal for some upholstery and soft goods.
Napa is a softer kind of leather that comes from the skin of young lamb
and calf. Contrary to suede, it comes from full grain or corrected grain
surfaces, which are also died and textured through regular processes.
Since napa leather has a very soft hand, it is often used for lining the
interiors of personal leather goods that are in close contact with the skin,
like high quality wallets, toiletry kits, gloves or shoes.
Embossed and perforated leather targeting
both aviation and automotive upholstery
applications. The surface details reveal intricate
woven-like embossed and laser-cut patterns.
182
LEATHER
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
TEXTURE
Although leather has a natural grain, which is on the smoother side of the
skin, it still gets grained or embossed artificially with different textures as
a part of the finishing process. This process is done through the applica-
tion of extreme pressures, and the result pieces are known as “corrected
grain” leathers. There are also a few hides with a perfect natural grain
texture and those are used for extremely high-end product applications.
High-end brands like Rolls Royce for example, pick out only the best
leathers with the best and smoothest surfaces thus eliminating the need
for an additional texture finish. These are known as “full grain” leathers.
Other texturing processes such as embossing and debossing consist
on heat pressing onto the leather surface with a solid metal die, creating
indentations of impressions
Benefits
1. The bigger the grain structure/pattern that is engraved, the more
defects and irregularities from the natural skin it will hide.
2. It is possible to create a two-tone contrast within the leather sur-
face by dyeing the top or “crust” layer in a different colour and later
on debossing a pattern onto it.
3. Textured leather and suede are used to enhance grip areas, such as
steering wheels grips or seats for sports cars.
Challenges
1. Debossing or embossing leather increases its perceived and real
value but it also decreases the strength of the area that gets treated.
2. In general, the more layers of finishing processes applied to a
leather hide, the stiffer and less elastic it will be.
DYEING /T ANNING
There are different processes to colour leather, including chromium, ani-
line and vegetable tanning. The most traditional process, chrome tanning,
uses a solution of chemicals, acids and chromium salts. Aniline tanning is
a process that uses only soluble dyes and leaves the surface without the
application of any finish or topcoat. Vegetable tanning uses vegetal-based
substances such as bark from trees. All processes work better when
applied to good quality leather as opposed to split or bonded leather.
183
CMF DESIGN
Benefits
1. Chrome tanning is a quick process that provides the leather pieces
with a more permanent and longer lasting colour, which does not
change throughout the product's lifespan. This process can also
provide leather with stain and water-resistant properties.
2. Vegetable tanning produces usually warmer and richer, more
natural tones as only natural ingredients are used for dying. This also
allows for the leather pieces to develop interesting patinas through
time and use, making them truly unique.
3. Vegetable tanning allows for fully recycling the material after used,
so it is more environmentally friendly than chrome tanning.
Challenges
1. When aniline tanning is used, the final surface of the hide will reveal
its natural grain as in the original animal skin — blemishes, scars — and
it does not present a uniform colour surface throughout.
2. Vegetable tanning can take up to 40 days to produce, since it is
mostly done by hand, which makes the final product more costly but
also more special.
3. Vegetable-tanned leather tends to discolour faster and to be less
resistant to water, so it tends to shrink after getting too much humid-
ity and moisture. If submerged in hot water, it will shrink and become
extremely rigid.
4. In general with any dyeing process, lighter shades of leather,
especially when used in automotive and aviation interiors, are harder
to clean and can get stained from external elements, like the indigo
dyes from denim jeans.
5. Chrome tanning has severe environmental implications since
chromium is a great pollutant and the leathers dyed through this
process are difficult to recycle. Chromium-tanned leather can contain
between 4 and 5% of chromium and cause allergic reactions to the
skin. Recycling and re-using of this type of leather is very challenging
as the chromium content in it cannot be destroyed or eliminated.
PERFORATING
Leather can be perforated in various different hole patterns. Typical
applications are steering wheels and automotive seat accent panels.
Benefits
1. Perforated leather is often and mostly used for its sporty aesthetic.
2. It is ideal for climate-controlled seats as the tiny perforations also
work as a vehicle for ventilation.
184
LEATHER
Challenges
1. Perforated leather is less resistant to wear and can tear around the
perforated holes. Smaller hole patterns are less likely to have tear
problems.
2. Dirt can accumulate within the perforated areas.
LASER MARKING /C UTTING
Laser marking consists of engraving the material surface through a sub-
limation process caused by a laser. By calibrating the performance of the
laser and its travel speed, the depth of the pattern can be modified. Laser
cutting consists of actually cutting the material with extreme accuracy,
in a specific pattern or shapes. For the purpose of cutting leather, a laser
cutter called CO2 is the most commonly used as its gas beam type is
easily absorbed by organic materials.
Both processes are common in the fashion and accessories industries.
In automotive interiors however, laser marking is more rear because the
structure of the leather can get damaged and the end surface, resulting
from the marking, needs to be sealed in order to comply with high indus-
try standards and regulations.
Benefits
1. Laser cutting can create extremely flexible, yet strong leather
surfaces ideal for apparel, accessories and soft goods applications.
2. Laser cutting is also used to cut leather in an extremely precise
way, avoiding fraying edges. This makes the technology ideal for dec-
orating small accessories or to create intricate surface patterns with
an almost hand-made quality at a relatively low cost. In fact, there is
a growing demand for laser cut textiles in general within the fashion
and apparel industry.
3. Because this is a non-contact process, the tool does not wear off
and the marking of the patterns remains consistent in depth and
quality throughout.
Challenges
1. Leather surfaces to be laser cut or laser marked must be completely
flat, with no crises or wrinkles as these can challenge the laser beam
to remain focused, creating unwanted pattern or cut distortions.
Leather surface textures are equally important, the smoother they
are, the best results will be obtained while marking or cutting them.
2. Laser cut edges in leather will normally be slightly darker in colour
than the original surface tone, in general the thicker the leather
surface to be cut, the darker the edge tone will be.
3. When laser marking a vegetable tanned leather, the marks or the
185
CMF DESIGN
pattern tend to appear darker or more contrasting with the surface
colour than if synthetic of heavily processed leather is used.
STITCH, EMBROIDERY AND PIPING
As with bespoke suits or custom car interiors, the stitching used to trim
or construct the products, is key in order to impart and define the quality,
look and feel of the product. Stich-finishing on leather for aviation and
automotive interior components, is a skilful practice with numerous
pattern and construction variations, such as plain seam, contrast stitch
seam, flat seam, French seam, topstitch seam and many others.
Leather embroidering is a way to premiumize any type of leather
application. In some interior leather applications, especially within the
luxury sector, the embroidery is mostly custom- made and sometimes
done by hand.
There are also other finishing details, like the piping of the.seat cov-
ers, which is a type of trim created with a strip of folded leather, or other
material in some cases. In order to create the piping the material is cut
on the bias as this way, it will have more elasticity to go around different
contours without creating bulk. In some cases, a tubular cord or similar
insert is placed inside the piping detail, in order to create and even,
fuller trim.
Benefits
1. Stitching can be used not only to construct the product together
but also to create the trim detail, all in one single step, i.e. cushion
tops in different colour and material compositions as part of the seat
cover of automotive interiors.
2. Embroidering a logo or a custom-detail is a very elegant way to
personalize it and provide it with a sense of exclusivity.
3. Piping details can be used to define and accentuate forms, material
contrast and, in some cases they are used to create visually recogniz-
able brand elements.
Challenges
1. Delicate hand stitching will naturally result in increased manufactur-
ing time and in a higher price point. This is usually a positive element
when it comes to luxury goods but it tends to be avoided within
mass-market products.
2. When stitched patterns are used as a decoration element, it is
important to plan how the pattern will work within the entire design
of the interior where it is placed. In general, the more complex the
design of the stitching is, the more time consuming it will be to make
and the higher the cost.
186
LEATHER
= co no wO o
0
w ” o5 ‘=i ®? © o¢ =< ? P2) < =e op e©i ~ e E % Q s < = c= <9= roG a£ y a 2 n )- a ° o n = o T~
O
o 0= - E o vso U2 ow 2st ] ° e f= 0e ] sCc e~o~< ££1 £ ) 5 2)O o s© ° a o ad=
ov -
CMF DESIGN
Detail of Jo Nagasaka’s resin and wood furniture
for Established & Sons.
188
WOOD
MOST COMMON TYPES
Wood is a natural material with an intrinsic comfortable touch. It provides
objects with an authentic feel and when combined with metal trims, it
creates an instant classic look.
As wood ages, it develops a patina, an attribute that helps increase
the perceived value of a product.
Currently, wood is becoming a very popular and desirable material,
especially in industries like consumer electronics and high-tech products.
The main reason for this surge is that natural wood brings a natural feel
to traditionally and otherwise cold-looking tech applications, providing
them with a unique and authentic finish — as natural patterns are always
different — and making them fit better into warmer home environments.
Natural Wood
Natural wood from trees is increasingly considered a vital material to
support the natural ecosystem. There has been lots of controversy about
the sustainability level of natural wood products recently, especially when
it comes from endangered species, therefore, certain types of wood are
now harvested from renewable resources and the creation of designs is
based on specific wood life cycles.
Natural wood can be broken into two main categories, solid wood
(lumber) and veneers. Veneers are thin layers of natural wood cut from a
log, cut either rotationally around the log or directionally across the log.
The cutting direction is used to describe the wood figure of a veneer, for
instance flat cut has a large cathedral figure while quarter cut and rift cut
have a straight figure.
Since wood is a natural material, it tends to absorb moisture and
expand or shrink depending on environmental conditions. Different types
of wood applications require different coating and finishing processes in
order to stabilize it before it gets laminated onto other substrates and also
to provide it with new functional and aesthetic properties, depending on
its final application.
Some important functional attributes of wood include the fact that it
is a highly acoustic material with heat isolation properties — regardless of
external temperatures — and the fact that it does not accumulate electro-
static charges.
Engineered Wood
Engineered woods, such as MDF or plywood, are man-made or “com-
posite” woods created by binding wood fibres, strands or veneers with
a range of adhesives and dyes in order to create a final “engineered” |
product with exact performance specifications and visual characteristics
189
CMF DESIGN
Specially processed veneers by Italian manu-
facturer Tabu. The veneers are manufactured
and dyed providing consistency of pattern and
colour. The process yields an almost infinite
range of possibilities when it comes to colour
options and surface design.
iAeeqybo eoiwqn )B ewe,
according to industry standards or targeted applications. A large number
of engineered woods are currently being developed not only as a way to
preserve natural forests, but also to ensure continuity of certain patterns
and grains. A high level of exclusivity can be achieved through the crea-
tion highly customized wood patterns, through very precise engineering
processes.
APPLICATIONS
Traditionally, wood trims have been used in car interiors to create a
personalized environment and elevate the value of the product. Initially,
actual trimmers with carpenter skills were responsible for crafting auto-
motive interiors trims, a practice that made the parts very unique but also
very costly. Today high-end brands still maintain the tradition of using real
wood trims by layering thin veneers, while lower-end brands have replace
them with plastic films with patterns that try to imitate real wood.
Wood applications for consumer products, like automotive and avia-
tion trims or small part inserts for consumer electronics, are created with
thin veneers ranging from 0.25 to 0.8 mm that are bonded with adhesive
to a less expensive core material or substrate, in order to provide them
with form and rigidity and as a way to make the material more stable.
For this process, veneers are utilized instead of solid wood because
although the latter one offers beautiful patterns, it is also very unstable
190
WOOD
or prune to warping and splitting. Once the wood is sliced into veneers
the adhesives added during the manufacturing process and the base ;
substrate to which it is glued, helps control its natural movements and
to present a visually appealing and functionally stable surface. The most
commonly used substrates for wood veneer applications in automotive,
aviation and consumer electronic industries include: fiberglass, plastic
(ABS), metal (aluminium), carbon fibre and plastic-metal hybrids.
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
LASER AND ENGRAVING
The laser process can be used to cut, engrave and build intricate pattern
designs and wood on wood inlays. The laser marking of wood is normally
done with a laser machine that uses a 1.6 microns weave length. Before
the laser marking process, the part to be treated is usually covered with a
film or tape in order to protect it from vapour damage and to avoid stain-
ing during the process. In some cases, after the laser marking is done, the
surface needs to get lightly sanded in order to remove any unwanted dark
marks occurred during the process.
To create inlays, the design is laser-engraved within the main surface.
Then the same pattern is laser-cut from a different type of wood veneer
and later inserted into the recessed area of the main surface created by
the engraving process.
Benefits
1. Through laser marking, it is possible to achieve significant depth, as
well as colour and surface contrast at quick speeds.
2. Wood types with high oil content will engrave better and produce
cleaner designs with better contrast. Likewise, surfaces with tighter
and finer wood grain will yield clearer, more contrasting designs.
Challenges
4. When laser marking/cutting composite wood veneers, if the laser
cuts too deep into the surface, some of the added external elements
like adhesives or resins — can cause unexpected burns or unwanted
effects in the design. This can also happen to the edges of the part,
which might burn faster and darker than the wood itself. In these
cases, proper calibration of the laser speed and temperature Is
recommended.
194
CMF DESIGN
2. If additional surface finishes are required for the part — such as
waxing, lacquering or oiling, it is recommended to apply those before
the lasering is done.
POLYURETHANE COATINGS
Although PU coatings are used in different industrial applications and on
different material substrates, one of its most common applications is on
wood dashboard trims for automotive, which are usually coated with a
layer of polyurethane as a protectant. PU coatings provide wood parts
with good resistance to moisture, chemical and mechanical impact and
help to smoothen out surface imperfections. Consumer products using
wood veneers, especially those expected to be in close contact with
human skin, can require up to five layers of PU coating applied to their
surface. Most PU coatings are either organic, solvent or water based.
Benefits
1. PU coatings provide an instant layer of isolation from external ele-
ments, protecting the parts from water, dirt and humidity in general.
Ae‘JOpSJsjNOOuNeiz dqeOdyw Ol iYNe n Aso To
The mobile phone wood cover is made with a
front and back veneer layer held together by
a glass fibre layer. A conventional PU system
was used for the coating by applying five layers
of transparent colour in order to cover and
smoothen the wood’s surface imperfections.
192
WOOD
They also seal in oil and solvents resulting from the manufacturing
process of the actual wood part.
2. PU coatings are soft to the touch which provides the surface with
a smooth appearance without altering the wood’s essential look
and feel.
Challenges
1. There is an increasing demand for water-borne and one-step
application for PU coatings due to restricted industry regulations and
sustainability concerns. However, when it comes to consumer appli-
cations, more natural finishing processes for wood, such as natural
fillers and waxes, are being prioritized as they allow the wood to be
in closer contact with external elements and therefore evolve and
change with time.
DYEING
One of the most common industrial processes for dyeing wood veneers
consists of impregnating the thin sheets in soluble dyes, through a pro-
cess of immersion in stainless steel tanks with controlled temperatures.
The colourants utilized for wood staining range from pigments colourants
to dye colourants, and can be classified according to the solvent in which
they dissolve: water, alcohol, lacquer thinner or oil soluble dyes.
Benefits
1. Dye-based stains are used in more refined applications like inlays or
delicate veneer work as they produce surfaces with even colour since
their particles are very small and penetrate deeply into the wood
structure, giving it a darker and clear colour.
2. Natural and water-based dyes are more environmentally friendly as
they are made with organic components and don’t have toxic chemi-
cals such as chromium or heavy metals.
Challenges
1. Pigment colourants have a larger particle and therefore do not
penetrate as deeply into the wood surface as dye-based pigments do,
providing a slightly muddier or less clean colour.
2. Dye stains tend to change colour over time, as they are more
sensitive to UV radiation. In some markets like Europe, this is a highly
appreciated characteristic while in markets like China or North
America this can be perceived as poor quality. Normally though, UV
coatings are applied to the veneers as a finish to protect the colour
from light effects.
193
CMF DESIGN
The Window Glass Table by Nendo contains four
layers of glass with cutout squares, creating
interesting shadows and textures.
GLASS
MOST COMMON TYPES
Glass is a man-made material — made mostly out of silica — with a rich
and beautiful appearance, which provides a sense of quality and value.
It is thought to have been made initially in the shape of Egyptian beads
between 2750 and 2625 BC and yet today it is regarded as a highly
sophisticated material that maintains its value through time. As this mate-
rial continues to gain popularity during the digital age, it has been used as
a direct metaphor to reference our current period in time as
“The Glass Age”.
Some of the key characteristics of glass, which cannot be re-created
or surpassed even by the most sophisticated imitation material, include
its clear transparency, its compressive strength and its coldness to the
touch. Its transparency makes it an ideal material choice for digital dis-
plays and for interactive surfaces that require high transparency in order
for the light to come through and high surface rigidity in order to protect
internal parts.
Challenging physical and mechanical properties of glass, like its brit-
tleness and heavy weight are being surpassed by incredible technological
advancements, ranging from optical fibre to bendable glass panes — as
flexible as paper — utilized to laminate and protect other materials and
surfaces.
As this material continues to gain importance for a number of
contemporary uses and industrial applications, it continues to be re-en-
gineered for higher performance with anti-shatter formulations, layered
constructions and with new treatments including anti-microbial formula-
tions and oleo phobic, anti-abrasion, and anti-glare coatings.
In terms of more aesthetically driven processes of glass there is a
very wide and almost endless palette of aesthetic possibilities, which are
currently having a sort of “new renascence” as they are re-discovered by
young designers and craft makers, especially in the area of home acces-
sories and tableware. Some of these processes include tinting, metaliz-
ing, printing, laser marking, acid etching, carving and engraving.
There are in general six types or categories of commercial glass based on
chemical composition:
1. Soda-lime glass, which contains from 60 to 65% content of silica
and is the most common and affordable type of glass.
2. Lead glass, which has high content of lead oxide and offers excel-
lent electrical insulating properties.
3. Borosilicate glass, which has at least 5% of boric oxide content and
offers resistant to high temperature changes and corrosion.
4. Aluminosilicate glass, which has aluminium content and offers high
195
CMF DESIGN
durability and is ideal for applications involving electrical conductivity
or high temperatures.
5. Ninety-six per cent silica glass which has almost none non-silica
elements, so it can resist heat-shock for up to 900 Centigrade.
6. Fused Silica glass, which is very difficult to fabricate but can withstand
temperatures higher than 1200 Centigrade for short periods of time.
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
TEMPERED AND LAMINATED GLASS
Since glass is very fragile and brittle, it tends to shatter on impact,
producing small cracks which eventually grow into a larger cracks. In
order to avoid these problems and also to increase its strength, a temper-
ing process is usually followed. Tempered glass is treated by controlled
thermal or chemical currents that increase its strength, and create
imbalanced internal stresses, prompting the glass to crumble into small
granular pieces when hit by a sharp object or sudden impact, making it
less likely to cause injury.
As a result of its safety and strength, tempered glass is used in a
variety of demanding applications, including passenger vehicle windows,
shower doors, architectural glass doors and tables, refrigerator trays, as a
component of bulletproof glass, diving masks, and various types of plates
and cookware.
Laminated glass is typically inter-layered with PVB (polyviny! butyral)
or EVA (ethylene-vinyl acetate). Technically treated layered glass is a type
of safety glass that holds together upon sharp or sudden impact, creating
a “spider web” pattern. In many cases the glass layering is designed to be
more ornamental as well, especially for architectural applications, where
interlayered textured films are bonded between two sheets of glass.
ANTI-SHUTTER GLASS
Recent anti-shatter glass formulations are based on altering the molecular
structure of glass through “ion exchange processes” where surface ion
particles formed during the manufacturing are replaced with larger ion
particles, in order to create compressive strength pressure and manage the
required tension on the part or product. These new formulations contrib-
ute to the creation of thinner and therefore lighter glass pieces, ideal for
automotive applications where lighter weight results in higher efficiency.
196
GLASS
ANTI-SCRATCH
Traditionally in the high-end watch industry, sapphire glass is utilized,
as it is highly resistant to scratches although it tends to be very brittle.
Recent anti-scratch formulations of glass composites are aiming to
achieve similar scratch resistance properties than sapphire glass in
combination with increased breakage strength.
Anti-scratch formulations and coatings for glass in commercial
applications — such as camera lenses, watches, notebooks, TV displays
and smart phones — help prolong the life of products. They can be applied
through different methods including thermal and UV cured, as well as
through deep and flow applications and because they are compatible
with anti-reflective, mirror and metalizing treatments, they are often
combined to offer also these properties.
OLEOPHOBIC COATINGS
Oleophobic coatings are not limited to glass surfaces. They can also
be applied to other materials like metals, polymers, textiles and glass
ceramics to name a few. These coatings are normally applied on surfaces
expected to have direct contact with human hands such as interactive
displays of digital devices and smart phones. They are often formulated
to be nano scale thin and some of them also help provide hydrophobic
or water repellence protection. The most common application methods
for oleo phobic coatings involve vacuum and/or vapour deposition and
spray processes.
ANTI-GLARE/ANTI-REFLECTION
These types of coatings are used to minimize surface reflections, help
sharpen visual contrast, reduce glare and make images more realistic by
improving contrast definition. They are used in a wide variety of appli-
cations, including automotive, instrument panels, binoculars, camera
lenses, telescopes and high-resolution applications such as digital art.
ANTI-MICROBIAL
With the growth of touch-displays made out of glass in digital electronics
and in large-scale interactive panels, the spread of microbes has become
an increasing concern. Anti-microbial properties for glass are becoming
rapidly the norm, especially if they are also combined with other protec-
tive properties. The anti-microbial function properties are directly built
into the glass by incorporating silver ions into the formulation, as previ-
ously noted, silver has anti-bacterial properties that naturally help reduce
the spread or germs.
197
CMF DESIGN
sA4OJseozOe \HGyVdOA7wN ne oso
After sanding the plastic, a layer of transparent
coating is sprayed to cover surface defects. After
the surface is smooth, a mirror silver coating is
applied. Lastly, a final layer of translucent topcoat
containing UV resistant elements is applied.
198
COATINGS
MOST COMMON TYPES
Coatings are a range of finishing processes utilized to improve the visual
and functional quality of a surface. Besides paint, which is one of the
most commonly and broadly used finishes, there are many other types of
coatings which are selected and applied depending on the desired final
functional and aesthetic properties of the product. Basically, any kind
of improved performance or mechanical property to be imparted onto a
surface can be achieved through the application of a coating.
Coatings can be purely decorative or purely functional, however,
in most consumer product applications, coatings are used for both
purposes. There are two kinds of general systems in the coating field,
UV-based (Ultra Violet) and PU-based (Polyurethane). Currently water-
based formulations involving one-step application processes are in high
demand for cost efficiency and sustainability reasons.
The coatings applied during the product manufacturing process are
called industrial coatings and they are the focus of this section, as they
are part of the design and manufacturing process or industrial product
design.
There are nuances and deep technical knowledge involved in the
selection and application of final coatings involving the creation of com-
plex multi-layered structures, capable of providing a substrate material
with UV or scratch resistance and properties such as self-healing, oil
repellence, water-proofing, fire retardancy, soft touch, anti-reflectivity,
self-cleaning, anti-microbial and many more.
There are different stages to the application of coatings depending
on the desired finish effect. One-step coatings are based on single-appli-
cation systems and are considered to be more efficient and sustainable.
Most coating processes however, involve two general steps: the base
coat, which defines the colour and the visual effect, and the topcoat,
which besides defining the gloss level and tactility of the surface, also
protects the base coat.
Some special and complex coating processes can involve the applica-
tion of five or more coating layers in order to create unique and exclusive
effects. For these types of multi-stage processes, the first step usually
consists of the application of one or more transparent layers to seal and
smoothen the surface so it can receive further processes; this step is
particularly common for porous or coarse materials like wood. The next
step is the application of the colour and visual effect to provide the part
with its aesthetic and visual characteristics. Finally, the last stage consists
on the application of the topcoat layer.
In terms of chemical formulations for paints and coatings, there is a
broad spectrum ranging from solvent to water-based. Within the auto-
199
CMF DESIGN
motive interior and the consumer electronic industries, there are new and
more sustainable developments including, low temperature energy-saving
coatings, which cure faster than the traditional two-stage PU coatings
and can be applied on plastic, composites and/or metal substrates.
MOST COMMON FINISHES AND
PROCESSES
SOFT TOUCH
In order to achieve the soft touch feel, coatings are applied as a finish
onto surfaces of products from different industries including consumer
electronics (laptops, phone cases, handheld electronics), household
appliances (vacuum cleaners, personal care, baby products), medical and
fitness devices (personal trackers, portable health monitors) and automo-
tive interior components.
The most common application of soft touch coatings are over
product parts expected to be in close contact to the touch, such as
handles, operation buttons or grips. In automotive interiors for instance,
soft touch finish is used on instrument panels and door trims as well as on
console and steering wheel components, in order to increase the overall
“soft comfort” of the space.
Benefits
1. Soft touch finishes are used to provide surfaces with a luxurious
touch and feel in fact, they can transform a coating’s industrial feel to
resemble other materials like velvet and leather, especially if com-
bined with a substrate surface with a pre-moulded 3D pattern in it.
2. Soft touch coatings offer very low reflectivity and low gloss level to
the surface they are applied to. This is an ideal characteristic for parts
and components utilized within automotive interiors where minimum
reflectivity is required for safety purposes.
3. They have also become very resistant to abrasion and scratching
which used to be a challenge in the past. Recently, one of the latest
developments of soft touch formulations, include resistance to
chemical elements like the combination of sun lotion and the insect
repellent DEET.
4. Soft touch coatings can provide the possibility of creating different
colours easily and they can be combined with other properties such
as UV resistance, in order to provide the parts with extra technical
characteristics.
200
COATINGS
SoNPCcfroiao i.smun srpthtliaene sgs y
The effect is achieved through IMD (In Mould
Decoration) technology. The “baby touch feel”
is added through a coating process applied to
the IMD film. Paired with the soft form of the
product, the overall effect is very pleasant to
the touch.
201
CMF DESIGN
A three-layers coating finish is applied on
Kevlar®, a material made by Du Pont™ with
aramid fibres, which has very high strength
and is very lightweight. It was coated through
a conventional PU coating system involving the
application of four layers of transparent colours,
in order to hide and smoothen any material irreg-
ularities. The first layers consist on soft touch
coating followed by a polishing process. The
final layer consists on soft touch coating only.
AenJpJONsjozuEoed yeQsz\w AOiyeeNN ys o d
5. The latest developments of soft touch coatings include water born
polyurethane formulations that provide low odour and low VOC
(volatile organic compounds) emissions, which makes them more
environmentally friendly.
Challenges
1. Soft touch coatings tend to be thicker than other coatings such as
UV for instance, so they can add some weight and thickness to the
part.
2. These type of coating finishes do not bear or withstand too much
dirt and cannot be wiped clean easily as the final surfaces, despite
being very soft to the touch, present high texture density in micro
pattern formations.
202
COATINGS
TOPCOAT
Topcoats are generally the last layer applied to a “base coat” or a sub-
strate material. Since they have no pigment content, they tend to be
of clear or translucent colour and their main function consist on acting
as surface protectants and sealers, while adding specific technical and
aesthetic properties to the parts.
There are several varieties and formulation of topcoats, which can be
water-based or solvent-based. There are also different application meth-
ods, including air-drying which hardens with oxidation, acrylics which dry
by solvent evaporation, and PU- or epoxy-based, which dry by cold-curing
chemical reactions. Some types of epoxy coatings can be also cured
through high temperatures, which transform them into harder finishes.
Benefits
1. Topcoats, especially with glossy finish, act visually as magnifying
glass, making the coating effect look very clear and the colour more
intense and beautiful.
2. Topcoats can improve the performance of any surface by adding
technical characteristics to it such as scratch and chemical resist-
ance and improved UV performance. They can also reduce moisture
penetration and provide surfaces with different levels of reflectivity
ranging from matte and satin to high gloss.
3. The use of topcoats make the surfaces easier to clean as they main-
tain external and potentially harming elements on the external surface
preventing them from penetrating and damaging the basecoat or the
actual substrate material.
Challenges
1. When using high gloss UV resistant topcoat, especially with a deep
colour, the surface will tend to reveal oil marks from fingerprints and
scratches more easily.
2. Topcoats tend to be denser in formulation than basecoats since
they are pigment free and they have lower pigment to solvent ratio.
PAINT AND SURFACE EFFECTS
Surface effects a normally decorative paint finishes applied to plastic
or other substrate materials, in order to give them a specific look and
feel and to increase the “added value” of the final product. They can be
achieved through the combination of colour, texture effects reflectivity
(gloss level), base material texture, etc. Some of the most common
surface effects applied through conventional spraying methods include
pearlescent, metallic, magnetic patterns, colour shifting and soft touch.
Other application methods can yield different surface finish effects.
203
CMF DESIGN
Powder coating for instance, which is applied as a free-flowing powder,
will yield a visually perfect and smooth surface in terms of pigment and
colour distribution.
Not all surface effects in consumer products applications are gen-
erally achieved through the application of paints and coatings. When
working with plastic for instance, it is possible to ad the desired effect
directly into the pigment mix before the fabrication or moulding of the
part. This approach can be more cost effective than post-process surface
effects, as it is done in one step.
Benefits
1. Coating effects are a direct way to increase product differentia-
tion without necessarily creating new product designs. In fact, the
same product can be on the market for a longer period of time when
only “seasonal surface updates” are done through unique and novel
coating effects.
2. Paint is one of the most versatile coating finishes for many indus-
tries and products as it allows for the creation of an almost infinite
range of decoration effects at a relatively low cost and with a quick
turn around.
Challenges
1. The pearlescent finish in particular tends to be somewhat translu-
cent due to the very nature of the pearl particle, therefore the base
colour of the substrate needs to be carefully selected as it might show
through or visually alter the final effect.
2. Applying a metallic finish effect to a surface can render it electri-
cally conductive. This is a special consideration when the end use of
the part is any kind of electronic equipment.
3. Not all substrates are suitable to apply paint and finish effects eas-
ily, in some cases it is necessary to smoothen and prepare the surface
through grinding, polishing or even applying layers of transparent
coating in order to smoothen it and cover defects. These processes
are especially necessary when creating fine finishes effects like
“mirror silver” which requires a perfectly smooth substrate surface.
4. Some base materials, like PP (polypropylene) require the applica-
tion of a gas flame method beforehand — which supplies oxidized gas
air to the part — in order to provide a chemical bond on its surface that
facilitates the adhesion of inks and paints. They key is then to select
the right material for the right finish or the right finish for the right
material.
204
COATINGS
oCIcfomo vauergstete rsoy
The Blulogiq technology is based on the use
of a thermolatent hardener which activates at
80°C and rapidly cures the coating on the plastic
substrate. The technology has the latitude to be
used in most colour and finish currently offered.
For automakers, this translates into a significant
time and cost advantage, while also significantly
reducing energy use.
205
CMF DESIGN
COLOUR DESIGN
- Eiseman, Leatrice. Color: Messages and Digital Colour Readers
Meanings. A Pantone Color Resource. - shop.variableinc.com/pages/colorsubscriptions
Gloucester, MA: Hand Books P, 2006. - colourpinbyncs.com/ - ncs colourpin
- bourncreative.com/meaning-of-the-colorgold Zero Project - Colour ADD
- bourncreative.com/meaning-of-the-colorsilver Universal Graphic Code
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. - zeroproject.org/practice/colour-identifica-
com/color-white.html tion-system-for-the-colourblind/
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology.
com/color-red.html MATERIAL DESIGN
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology.
com/color-orange.html
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. BMW i3
com/color-yellow.html - draexlmaier.com/fileadmin/
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. user_uploads/_docs/fachartikel/atzworld-
-com/color-green.html wide_2014_116_06_i_020-023_kenaf_draexl-
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. maier_onlinepdf.pdf
com/color-blue.html - bmw.com/com/en/newvehicles/i/i3/2013/
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. showroom/design.html
com/color-purple.html Recycled Textiles
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. - repreve.com
com/color-silver.html
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology. FINISH DESIGN
com/color-gold.html
- empower-yourself-with-color-psychology.
com/cultural-color.html Anodizing
+ empower-yourself-with-color-psychology- - en.wikipedia.org/wiki/brushed_metalfinish-
com/color-black.html ing.com/53/33.shtml
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/beet Bayer Coatings
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/carrot - bayermaterialsciencenafta.com/newsletters/
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/cephalopod_ink apr15/index.html
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/chili_pepper Chemical Etching
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/clitoria_ternatea - fotofab.com/cmp_typical.php
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/clover Coatings
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/corn - akzonobel.com/wood/ee/system/images/
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/gold_leaf akzonobel_industrial_finishing_wood_facts_
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/rice and_figures_tem125-34902p.d f
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/vark - designnews.com/document.asp?doc
- informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/ _id=229027&dfppparams=ind_183,aid_
colours-in-cultures 229027&dfplayout=article
- netlibrary.net/articles/carrots Cold Forging Process Apple Watch
- sensationalcolor.com - apple.com/watch/craftsmanship
- xrite.com/fm-100-hue-scoring-system/ Cold Forging Process Huawei
accessories - prnewswire.com/news-releases/huaweiun-
Allsteel Clarity Chair veils-huawei-watch-at-mobile-world-con-
- allsteeloffice.com/synergydocuments gress-2015-300043257.html
Coloradd Crease and Weld Bag Studies
- coloradd.net - fastcodesign.com/3023268/wanted/manu-
- youtu.be/qbb-htbrhpi - video facturing-materials-become-minimalist-hand-
Colour Discrimination Tests bags#1
- color-blindness.com Digital Printing
Fluorescent Colour Tests - zimmer-austria.com/en/products/products/
- dayglo.com/who_we_are/fluorescent_color_ chromojet/chromojet-digital-en/index.html
theory - dailydesignews.com/moooi-launches-
newcarpets-company
206
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Elastomers NMT (Nano Moulding Technology)
: e en l. aw sti ok mi ep re dia.org/wiki/thermoplastic_
-
-
c ch hi in na ai in nm mo ou ul ld d. .c co om m/ /a ar rt ti ic cl le e- -8 99 31 6- -1 1. ,h ht tm ml
l
- glstpes.com/resources_trends_consumeren-
Plastic Composites
Emh ban oc se sm ie nn gt .php . sciencearchive.org.au/nova/059/059key. html
Oleo-phobic Coatings
. advantagefabricatedmetals.com/embossing-
. aculon.com/oleophobic-coatings.php
process.html - youtu.be/rR_Ix9CPcao - Video 1
Extruding Metal - youtu.be/q2b39dNjj9o - Video 2
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/extrusion Plastic Overmoulding
- bonlalum.com/extrusion_process.shtml - evcoplastics.com/overmolding
Flexible Glass by Corning
Polypropylene Processes
* corning.com/in/en/products/display-glass/ . ineos.com/global/olefins%20and%20poly-
products/corning-willow-glass.html mers%2Ousa/products/technical%20informa-
Forging tion/ineos_polypropylene_processing_guide.
- en.wikipedia.org/wiki/forging pdf
Glass Types PVD Coatings
- cmog.org/article/types-glass - pvd-coatings.co.uk/applications/decorative
Glass Video - How it is Made Guys - inform.pt/nano4color
- youtu.be/120sbjwogfe - part 1 Silver
- youtu.be/13b5k_laabw - part 2 - silverinstitute.org/site/silver-in-industry/
huawei ascend P7 electronic
> consumer.huawei.com/au/mobile-phones/ Soft Touch Video from Bayer Material
gallery/p7-l0-au.htm Science
IMD - youtu.be/naddif8o0r4q
- nissha.com/english/products/industrial_m/ Textile Bonding
imd/index.html - texbond.co.nz/products
IMR - books.google.com/books?id=cskoekzxvi8c&
- google.com/patents/Uus20110251706 dq=recycling+bonded+materials&-
Injection Moulding Plastic source=gbs_navlinks_s
- avplastics.co.uk/advantages-and-disadvan- Textiles - Ultrasonic Bonding
tages-of-injection-moulding - textileworld.com/issues/2005/november
Laser -december/features/ultrasonic_bonding
> engadget.com/2014/06/17/laser-cut- _of_nonwovens-films_and_textiles
clothingexplainer/ Topcoats
- cutlasercut.com/laser-cutting-materialslaser- - corrosionpedia.com/definition/1098/
engraving-materials/laser-cut-leather topcoating
Lasering Wood Dyeing
- info.laserstar.net/blog/bid/87785/traditional- - awfi.org/wood-dye-stain-technologies
engraving-vs-laser-engraving-for-jewelry - alpiwood.com/en/production_process
Leather Wood Laser Marking
- haipeichem.com/uploadfile/ - lotuslaser.com/applications/wood-laser
2013/1109/20131109033635111p.d f etching
- maxwellscottim.hubpages.com/hub/ - boothveneers.com
chrome-versus-vegetable-tanned-leather - youtu.be/x4wOvuojagu
- leathernet.com/leather.htm - mataauto.com/?page_id=3565
Leather Stitching - joewoodworker.com/veneering/why-useve-
- innovationsautointeriors.com/auto-uphol- neer.htm
stery-stitching Wood Veneers Manufacturer
Leather Tanning - tabu.i t
- oecotextiles.wordpress.com/tag/vegetable- ZTE Grand S EXT (NMT)
tanning - chinainmould.com/article-1081-1.html
Metal Forging
- thomasnet.com/articles/custom-manufactur- 2
ing-fabricating/hot-forging-cold-forging
207
“tos Sy»
CREDITS
CMF Design
The Fundamental Principles of Colour,
Material and Finish Design
Publisher
Frame Publishers
Author
Liliana Becerra
Research assistants
Rhadika Balla, Amaya Gutierrez,
Victoria Lin and Kristina Marrero
Production
Sarah de Boer
Graphic design
Liliana Becerra, Carlo Llacar,
Claudia Geidobler, Zoe Bar-Pereg
and Barbara Iwanicka
Concept, production and
photography ice creams colours
Liliana Becerra, Carmen Rosa Lopez and
Paulino Pachacama
Trade distribution rest of world
Prepress Thames & Hudson Ltd
Edward de Nijs 181A High Holborn
London WC1V 7QX
Thanks to contributions of United Kingdom
Claudia Geidobler, Janice De Jong, Suzette T +44 20 7845 5000
Henry, Nancy Holman, Johannes Lampela, F +44 20 7845 5050
Angelina Li, Sandy McGill, Rick Niefield,
Hirobe Nobuyasu, Brian Paschke, Alex ISBN 978-94-91727-79-5
Rasmussen, Natalie Roy, Stephie Sijssens, © 2016 Frame Publishers, Amsterdam, 2016
Diceke Yamaguchi, Akzo Nobel, Clariant
Automotive, High Tech Finishing, Mold-Tech, All rights reserved. No part of this publi-
Neal Feay, Nissha Printing Co. and Rohi cation may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic
Trade distribution USA and or mechanical, including photocopy or
Canada any storage and retrieval system, without
Consortium Book Sales & Distribution, LLC. permission in writing from the publisher.
34 Thirteenth Avenue NE, Suite 101,
Minneapolis, MN 55413-1007 Whilst every effort has been made to ensure
United States accuracy, Frame Publishers does not under
T +1 612 746 2600 any circumstances accept responsibility
T +1 800 283 3572 (orders) for errors or omissions. Any mistakes or
F +1 612 746 2606 inaccuracies will be corrected in case of
subsequent editions upon notification to the
Trade distribution Benelux publisher.
Frame Publishers
Laan der Hesperiden 68 Printed on acid-free paper produced from
1076 DX Amsterdam chlorine-free pulp. TCF oo
the Netherlands Printed in Slovenia
distribution@frameweb.com
frameweb.com 987654321
208 4

Only when the perfect balance between visual beauty and
functional performance is achieved, can a product provide
a consistent and successful user experience. The discipline
of CMF design focuses on designing and specifying colours,
materials and finishes to support both functional and emotional
attributes of products. The work of the CMF designer
combines aesthetics and practical knowledge of materials and
technologies with intangible human perceptions of value.
This area of design expertise is increasingly in demand.
Consumer product manufacturers have an enhanced awareness
of its great potential for diversifying product portfolios at
relatively low costs, while still maintaining a similar or the
same product shape, functionality or tooling. It can work as
a key avenue to create a sense of novelty and higher value
propositions. From a marketing perspective, CMF design is
a valuable tool when it comes to positioning products,
collections and categories according to market tiers and
consumer segmentations.
Introducing the CMF process and detailing the areas of colour,
finish and material design, this book serves as a valuable source
of information about this emerging professional discipline and
its fundamental principles.